A tropism (from Greek τρόπος, tropos, "a turning") is a biological phenomenon, indicating growth or turning movement of a biological organism, usually a plant, in response to an environmental stimulus. In tropisms, this response is dependent on the direction of the stimulus (as opposed to nastic movements which are non-directional responses). Viruses and other pathogens also affect what is called "host tropism", "tissue tropism", or "cell tropism", or in which case tropism refers to the way in which different viruses/pathogens have evolved to preferentially target specific host species, specific tissue, or specific cell types within those species. Tropisms are usually named for the stimulus involved (for example, a phototropism is a reaction to sunlight) and may be either positive (towards the stimulus) or negative (away from the stimulus).
Tropisms are typically associated with plants (although not necessarily restricted to them). Where an organism is capable of directed physical movement (motility), movement or activity in response to a specific stimulus is more likely to be regarded by behaviorists as a taxis (directional response) or a kinesis (non-directional response).
In English, the word tropism is used to indicate an action done without cognitive thought: However, "tropism" in this sense has a proper, although non-scientific, meaning as an innate tendency, natural inclination, or propensity to act in a certain manner.
In botany, the Cholodny–Went model, proposed in 1927, is an early model describing tropism in emerging shoots of monocotyledons, including the tendencies for the stalk to grow towards light (phototropism) and the roots to grow downward (gravitropism). In both cases the directional growth is considered to be due to asymmetrical distribution of auxin, a plant growth hormone.


== Types ==

Chemotropism, movement or growth in response to chemicals
Geotropism (or gravitropism), movement or growth in response to gravity
Heliotropism, diurnal motion or seasonal motion of plant parts in response to the direction of the sun, (e.g. the sunflower)
Hydrotropism, movement or growth in response to water
Phototropism, movement or growth in response to lights or colors of light
Thermotropism, movement or growth in response to temperature
Electrotropism, movement or growth in response to an electric field
Thigmotropism, movement or growth in response to touch or contact
Exotropism, continuation of growth "outward," i.e. in the previously established direction
Ecotropism, limited host range (e.g. infects only one species or cell type)
Amphotropism, wide host range (e.g. infects many of entry into cells used by a given strain of HIV)
Neurotropism, a virus that preferentially infects the host's nervous system
Photoperiodism, is response to seasons


== See also ==
Chemotaxis
Rapid plant movement


== References ==
Notes

Sources