A flatbread is a bread made with flour, water and salt, and then thoroughly rolled into flattened dough. Many flatbreads are unleavened—made without yeast—although some are slightly leavened, such as pita bread.
There are many other optional ingredients that flatbreads may contain, such as curry powder, diced jalapeños, chili powder, or black pepper. Olive oil or sesame oil may be added as well. Flatbreads can range from one millimeter to a few centimeters thick.
Flatbread was already known in Ancient Egypt and Sumer. In ancient Mesopotamia (modern day Iraq), the Sumerians discovered that edible grains could be mashed into a paste and then baked/hardened into a flatbread.

Unleavened breads (such as matzoh which is not prepared with leavening agents) are usually flatbreads and hold special religious significance to adherents of Judaism and Christianity.


== List of flatbreads ==


=== Europe, Central and West Asia ===

Afghan bread or "Nan" (Afghanistan)
Bannock (Scotland)
Barbari bread (Persia)
Bazlama (Turkey): made from wheat flour, drinking water, and table salt
Bolani (Afghanistan): a vegetarian flat-bread dish
Farl (Ireland and Scotland)
Flammkuchen/Tarte flambée (Alsace): thin bread dough rolled out in a circle or a rectangle and covered with onions and bacon
Flatbrød (Norway): barley flour, salt and water
Flatkaka (Iceland): rye flatbread
Focaccia (Italy)
Ftira (Malta)
Gözleme (Turkey): folded over a savoury filling and fried on a griddle
Hoggan (Cornwall): made from barley flour containing pieces of green pork and potato
Lángos (Hungary)
Lavash (Armenia)
Matnakash (Armenia)
Obi Non (Afghanistan and Uzbekistan)
Opłatek (Poland)
Pane carasau (Sardinia)
Piadina (Italy): white flour, lard (or olive oil), salt and water
Pide (Turkey)
Pita (Greece)
Pită/Lipie (Romania)
Pizza (Italy)
Podpłomyk (Poland)
Rieska (Finland)
Sacramental bread (Europe)
Sangak (Persia)
Sheermal (Persia and Indian subcontinent)
Shotis Puri (Georgia)
Somun and Lepina (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Taftoon Bread (Persia)
Tigella (Italy)
Tonis Puri (Georgia)
Torta (Spain)
Torta al testo (Umbria, Italy)
Torta de Gazpacho (Spain)
Tunnbröd (Sweden): any combination of wheat, barley and rye
Yufka (Turkey): wheat flour, water and table salt


=== Middle East and Africa ===

Aish Merahrah (Egypt): made with 5 -10% ground fenugreek seeds and maize
Barbari (Iran)
Gurassa (Sudan)
Harsha (Morocco): fried buttery bread made of semolina
Injera (Horn of Africa): teff flour and water
Khebz (Levant)
Khubz (Arabian Peninsula)
Lahoh (Somalia, Djibouti, Yemen)
Malooga (Yemen): water, yeast, salt and flour
Chapati (Swahili coast, Uganda)
Markook (Levant)
Matzo (Israel): white plain flour and water
Ngome (Mali): millet, water and vegetable oil
Pita (Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East)
Sangak (Iran)
Taftan (Iran)


=== South and East Asia ===

Bhakri (India): made with water and millet flour
Bhatura (India): made with white flour, yogurt, ghee (or oil), and yeast
Bindaeddeok (Korea): made from mung bean flour {this is a pancake, not a flatbread}
Bing (China)
Piaya (Philippines)
Bánh (Vietnam)
Chapati (India, Pakistan): made from atta flour (whole grain durum wheat), water and salt
Poli (India): made from whole wheat flour, water and salt. It is folded and layered round flat bread.
Fulka (India): made from whole wheat flour, water and salt. It is like a baked variety of Puri.
Green onion pancake (China): made with oil and minced scallions (green onions)
Paratha (India, Sri Lanka, Nepal)
Khanom buang (Thailand): rice flour
Laobing (China)
Luchi (East India and Bangladesh): fine maida flour with water and a spoonful of ghee
Naan (Central and South Asia): leavened with yeast, unlike Roti bread
Pol roti (Sri Lanka): made from scraped coconut and wheat or kurakkan flour, with green chillis and onion
Puri (India, Pakistan, Nepal): prepared from dough of atta and salt
Roast paan (Sri Lanka): bread mixture baked in a flat mold, producing, literally, a 'flat' bread
Roti (Central and South Asia)
Roti prata (Singapore)
Roti canai (Malaysia and Indonesia)
Sanchuisanda (China): baked in ashes


=== Americas ===

Arepa (Colombia, Venezuela): flat, unleavened patty made of cornmeal
Bammy (Jamaica): made from grated cassava root or cassava flour and salt
Beiju (Brazil): made from tapioca
Casabe (South America, Caribbean): made from bitter cassava root
Frybread (United States)
Native American Flatbread (North America): made from maize flour in a traditional style of early Native Americans; now topped with ground beef, vegetables, beans and cheese
Pan de Semita (Mexico)
Johnnycake (Caribbean)
Tortilla (Mexico, Central and South America)
Tortilla de Rescoldo (Chile): wheat flour based bread, traditionally baked in the coals of a campfire


== See also ==

List of breads


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
2005. "High-Profile Flatbreads - Say Goodbye to Insipid White Bread When Tortillas and Flatbreads Come to Town". FOOD PRODUCT DESIGN -NORTHBROOK-. 15, no. 1: 96-114. ISSN: 1065-772X.
2008. "Flatbreads Old World: Meets New Flatbreads from All Over the World-Including Tortillas, Arepas and Naan-Are the Newest Hot Ticket in Both Retail and Foodservice Products". FOOD PRODUCT DESIGN -NORTHBROOK-. 18, no. 11: 38-43.
2008. "Storied Breads: With a Continuing Focus on Food Origin, Flatbreads Offer Manufacturers a Way to Tempt Consumers with Authentic Products Celebrating the Oldest-Known Bread Traditions". BAKING AND SNACK. 30, no. 7: 35-42. ISSN: 1092-0447.
2010. "Glycaemic Index of Indian Flatbreads (Rotis) Prepared Using Whole Wheat Flour and Atta Mix-Added Whole Wheat Flour". British Journal of Nutrition. 103, no. 11: 1642-1647. ISSN: 0007-1145.
2011. "Flat-Out in Love with Flatbread Here Are 5 Reasons Foodservice Is Smitten with Flatbreads". FOOD MANAGEMENT -NEW YORK THEN CLEVELAND OH-. 46, no. 11: 30-35. ISSN: 0091-018X.
Alford, Jeffrey, and Naomi Duguid. Flatbreads and Flavors: A Baker's Atlas. New York: W. Morrow, 1995. Summary: Recipes for more than sixty varieties of flatbreads along with 150 recipes for traditional accompaniments to the breads, including chutneys, curries, salsas, stews, mezze, smorgasbord, kebabs, etc.
Craddock, Anne. Textural Characteristics of Bagels and Ethnic Flatbreads. 1998. Thesis. 124 leaves.
German, Donna Rathmell. Flatbreads from Around the World. San Leandro, Calif: Bristol Pub, 1994.
Hansen, Eric. 2015. "Fabled Flatbreads of Uzbekistan." Aramco World. July/August 2015. Pages 32-39.
Helou, Anissa. Savory Baking from the Mediterranean: Focaccias, Flatbreads, Rusks, Tarts, and Other Breads. New York: William Morrow, 2007.
Kahlon, Talwinder Singh, and Mei-Chen Maggie Chiu. 2014. "Ancient Whole Grain Gluten-Free Flatbreads". Food and Nutrition Sciences. 05, no. 17: 1717-1724.
Khawaja K.I., et al. 2012. "Glycaemic, Insulin and Ghrelin Responses to Traditional South Asian Flatbreads in Diabetic and Healthy Subjects". British Journal of Nutrition. 108, no. 10: 1810-1817.
Reinhold, John G., Bahram Faraji, Parichehr Abadi, and Faramarz Ismail‐Beigi. 1981. "An Extended Study of the Effect of Iranian Village and Urban Flatbreads on the Mineral Balances of Two Men Before and After Supplementation with Vitamin D†". Ecology of Food and Nutrition. 10, no. 3: 169-177.