This is a list of alien races that appear in Marvel Comics.


== Overall infoEdit ==
There are several different extraterrestrial races in Marvel Comics universe. The vast majority are humanoid in structure.


=== Galactic CouncilEdit ===
The Galactic Council is the assembly of numerous leaders of different empires across the universe (including other dimensions like Asgard or the Negative Zone) created to deal with different matters of the universe.


== Major racesEdit ==
A few alien races have had considerable "air time" in various Marvel Comics publications over the years, having a near-constant presence and/or major crossovers and storylines involving them. This includes:
The Badoon (first seen in Silver Surfer #2) - A race of reptilian aliens that are notable for living under strict gender segregation, resulting in two separate societies: the Brotherhood of Badoon (ruled by a "Brother Royal") and the Sisterhood of Badoon (ruled by a Queen).
The Brood (first seen in Uncanny X-Men #155) - The Brood are a race of insectoid, parasitic, extraterrestrial beings.
The Celestials (first seen in The Eternals #1) - The Celestials have existed near the birth of the universe.
The Dire Wraiths (first seen in Rom the Spaceknight #1) - The Dire Wraiths are an evolutionary offshoot of the Skrulls from the Andromeda Galaxy. Like the Skrulls, the Wraiths are shapeshifters where they are able to take the forms of other creatures.
The Kree (first mentioned in Fantastic Four #64; first seen in Fantastic Four #65 (Blue) and Marvel Super Heroes #12 (Pink)) - The Kree (also known as the Ruul) are a scientifically and technologically advanced militaristic alien race that are native to the planet Hala in the Large Magellanic Cloud. The Kree are the rivals of the Skrull.
The Phalanx in Uncanny X-Men #312 - The Phalanx are a cybernetic species that form a hive-mind linking each member by a telepathy-like system.
The Shi'ar (first seen in X-Men #97) - The Shi'ar Empire (or Imperium), is a vast collection of alien species, cultures, and worlds situated close to the Skrull and Kree Empires. The Shi'ar are also called the Aerie.
The Skrulls (first seen in Fantastic Four #2) - The Skrulls are a race of shapeshifting aliens that originated from the planet Skrullos. The Skrulls are the rivals of the Kree.
The Symbiotes (first seen in Secret Wars crossover #8) - The Symbiotes are a fictional race of amorphous extraterrestrial parasites that envelop their hosts like costumes, creating a symbiotic bond through which the host's mind can be influenced.
The Watchers (first seen, in the form of Uatu, in Fantastic Four #13) - The Watchers are one of the oldest species in the universe and are committed to observing and compiling knowledge on all aspects of the universe. After an incident with the Prosilicans, the Watchers then took a vow never to interfere with other civilizations.


== Secondary racesEdit ==
Scores of other extraterrestrial races have been depicted in the pages of Marvel Comics publications, though not to the extent of the races mentioned above. This list is not comprehensive.


=== AEdit ===
Aakon - First appeared in Captain Marvel. A race of yellow-skinned, dark-haired humanoids, the Aakon are enemies of the Kree and are allied with the Shadow Consortium. They have an Intergalactic Council and sought the destruction of all human life due to the perceived universal threat of Earth's population of super-beings. A number of Aakon colonies have since been destroyed by the Annihilation Wave.
Aedians - First appeared in Silver Surfer. The Aedians possess telepathic powers; they can sense the presence of others within their planet's orbit. They are also empathic, able to sense the pain or emotions of others. They can project their astral selves, even into orbit. They are thin humanoid bipeds, with an elongated cranium and no noses.
A'askvarii - First appeared in Black Goliath. A green-skinned humanoid race with octopus traits, possessing two legs (ending in three-toed taloned feet) and three tentacles sprouting from each shoulder in place of arms. They possess gills in place of a nose, and closely spaced needle-like teeth. They possess fairly advanced technology, with warp-drive capability. A'askvarii are native to the planet O'erlanii; it is an oceanic world with oceans covering 75% of the planet's surface, and the rest being craggy mountains.
Acanti - See Acanti.
Achernonians - First appeared in Thor. A purple-skinned humanoid race native to the planet Achernon. Achernonians are a tall race, averaging 6'4" tall, and possess only a pre-Industrial level of technology. They are depicted as superstitious, with a dictatorial government. Some possess the ability to become immaterial at will. The planet Achernon is a rocky world, 60% covered in volcanic rock; the atmosphere possesses a high sulfur content.
A-Chiltarians - First appeared in Tales to Astonish. A humanoid race possessing many eyes and purple-grey fur over their entire bodies, with four-fingered hands and three-toed feet. They possess a tribal culture, and are mildly aggressive and temperamental. They are native to A-Chiltar III, a marshy planet (60% marsh, 40% prairie), and the atmosphere has a high methane content.
Alpha Centaurians - First appeared in Sub-Mariner. A humanoid race with fine grey scales and other adaptations (gills, webbed toes) that enable them to live underwater. Their governments is a feudal one, organized into several small, independent kingdoms; their culture tends to be self-centered and dispassionate. They are native to Arima, which has water covering 95% of its surface, and its gravity and atmospheric thickness are both approximately twice that of Earth. They possess spacecraft capable of 85% lightspeed.
Amebids - A race of jellyfish-like aliens that come from the planet Sakaar. Amebids can inflate their bodies with noxious gases that they produce enabling them to float like balloons. They first appeared in Incredible Hulk Vol. 2 #92.
Archeopians - The Archeopians are from the planet Archeopia. Most of the race was killed when the incubator cube of Galactus was opened and he consumed Archeopia. The small fleet which escaped has since sailed the galaxy for uncounted centuries with other aliens who lost their planets to Galactus called The Wanderers. First seen in Thor #160 (January 1969).
Arcturans - First appeared in Fear. A humanoid race with pink-white skin, approximately half their populations are mutants due to a combination of biochemical advancements. They are native to Arcturus IV. Their technology level is comparable to Earth's. In the 31st century, two of the best-known Arcturans are Starhawk and Aleta, members of the Guardians of the Galaxy.
Aris - The Aris are an alien race that comes from the planet Ariston. First appeared in Marvel Comics Presents #49.
Arthrosian - A race of insectoids that come from the planet Anthros in the Negative Zone. Annihilus is an Arthrosian. First appeared in Fantastic Four Annual #6.
Astrans - First appeared in The Incredible Hulk. A humanoid race with yellow skin and toe-less, flat feet, no hair, four lungs, and special glands in the stomach. They have the ability to control metal like Magneto and three-quarters of the population are either priests or artists. They are native to Astra, where 50% of the planet surface is metallic ore, and the remained is split evenly between water and soil.
Ataraxians - The Ataraxians are a race of aliens from the planet Ataraxia in the Negative Zone. First appeared in Annihilation: Super-Skrull #2.
Autocrons - First appeared in Machine Man. A humanoid race with blue-black skin, two-toed feet, and an average height of 6'5". Their bodies are iron-based rather than carbon-based, and they possess superhuman strength and durability. Their government is ruled by a world-computer (and their level of technology is more than Earth's); their culture is imperialistic, militaristic, and orderly. They are native to Cron, which possess a gravity and atmospheric density almost three times greater than Earth's, and the atmosphere has a high methane content. Cron is rich in metallic ores and only has 4% surface water; mechanized cities cover 85% of the planet.
Axi-Tun - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A humanoid race that appears much like tall humans, with an average height of 6'4". They live on the planet Tun. Axi-Tun have energy-manipulating powers. Axi-Tun have a level of technology superior to Earth's, with the capability of faster than light travel. Four Axi-Tun explorers crash-landed on Earth during World War II, and a Nazi scientist named Werner Schmidt named them after Teutonic gods. These Axi-Tun battled the Invaders but committed suicide to keep their technology from falling into human hands. Many years later, four Axi-Tun warriors calling themselves "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse" attacked Earth but were defeated by the Fantastic Four.


=== BEdit ===
Ba-Bani - First appeared in Avengers. A humanoid race with yellow skin and orange or yellow hair. They are governed by local military dictatorships, tend to be warlike and engaging in a planet-wide war. They are native to the planet Ba-Banis, an Earth-like world which orbits the star they call Ba.
Beyonders - The Beyonders are an enigmatic and virtually omnipotent extradimensional race. The Beyonders were first mentioned in the team-up comic Marvel Two-in-One #63 (May 1980), by Mark Gruenwald and Jerry Bingham. They are a race of extra-dimensional entities powerful enough to collect planets. Their nature is so alien that they are unable to leave their own dimension and have never been observed by any being of the Earth dimension, and to interact with the Earth dimension they must operate through agents.
Baluurians - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A humanoid race, stronger and tougher than humans. Baluurians are native to the Negative Zone, where they have established an empire. Blastaar and Burstaar are Baluurians.
Betans - First appeared in Godzilla. A humanoid race with light purple skin, two-toed feet, and wings which enable them to fly in low-gravity environments. They live on the planet Beta. Their technology is superior to that of Earth and they are capable of faster than light travel. The people of Beta were engaged in centuries in a war with the neighboring planet Megan.
Bidoceros - First appeared in The Incredible Hulk. They have flat bodies with a tube-like vocal protuberance.
Biphasians - The Biphasians are a race of aliens from the planet Biphasia.
Birjans - A humanoid race from Birj sixth moon of the planet Marman, a gas-giant that is the seventh planet from its sun. Terrax is a Birjan. First seen in Fantastic Four #211 (October 1979).
Builders - First mentioned in Avengers. The Builders are one of the oldest races in the universe and go about building and creating worlds as they see fit, a claim also attributed to the Celestials, however any connection between this two races remains unknown. They are the creators of the Superflow which facilitate White Events.


=== CEdit ===
Calurnians - The Calurnians are a race of aliens with cat-like features. First appeared in Rom Annual #4.
Carmondians - The Carmondians are an alien race with a variety of appearances. First appeared in Captain Marvel Vol. 3 #4
Centaurians - First appeared in Marvel Super-Heroes #18. The Centaurians were depicted as a humanoid race with blue skin and a sizable red dorsal fin along the back and atop their head that gives them an average height of 7 feet (2.1 m). As shown in that issue, some demonstrate "psionic" abilities. They are a primitive tribal race, using bows and arrows in hunting. Centaurians are native to Centauri IV. Yondu of the Guardians of the Galaxy is a Centaurian.
Centurii - First appeared in Thor. A humanoid race with light yellow skin and a culture composed largely of philosophers and artists. The Centurii are native to Centuri-Six, an Earth-like world. The Centurii have a worldwide democracy, and their level of technology is comparable to Earth's. There are few Centurii on their planet.
Chitauri - First appeared in Ultimates. The Chitauri are a fictional race of extraterrestrial shapeshifters that appear in publications by Marvel Comics's alternative universe. They belong to the Ultimate Marvel timeline continuity. The Chitauri later crossed over into the mainstream universe.
Chnitt - First appeared in Uncanny X-Men #358.
Chr'Ylites - First appeared in X-Men. An insectoid race, averaging 1'6" in length, possessing two red eyes, and transparent insectile wings on top of their bodies, making them resemble a cross between a dragonfly and a helicopter. They are highly empathic. They are native to the planet Chr'Yllalisa. Sikorsky is a Chr'Ylite.
Ciegrimites - First appeared in Hercules. A green-skinned hairless humanoid race with snail-like traits, Ciegrimites average 4' in height, have snail-like shells around their trunks, and their eyes are on raised stalks. Their technology is incredibly advanced in the area of alcoholic beverage distillation; their homeworld, Ciegrim-7, is known as "the Distiller's Planet."
Clavians - First appeared in Rom the Spaceknight. A humanoid race that appear similar to humans from Earth. They live on the planet Clarius, and are a tribal people, with technology inferior to Earth's. Dire Wraiths invaded Clarius, but were defeated by Rom.
Contraxians - First appeared in Jack of Hearts. A humanoid race with pink or brown skin, who appear as humans except that the left sides of their bodies are darker-hued than the right sides. Contraxians live on the planet Contraxia. Two Contraxian women, going by the names Marcy Kane and Marie Hart, were sent to Earth disguised as humans to find a means to rekindle their sun's dying energies. Marie Hart was able to conceive a child with a human, who grew up to become the Jack of Hearts.
Cotati - See Cotati.
Courga - First appeared in Marvel Presents. A humanoid dog race with brown skin, three fingers on each hand, two toes on each foot, Courga average 7'2" in height. They live on the planet Courg.


=== DEdit ===
Dakkamites - First appeared in Silver Surfer. A humanoid race that appears mostly indistinguishable from humans. Dakkamites come from the planet Dakkam. Exposure to Earth's yellow sun grants them super-powers, as their cells have the ability to absorb and metabolize solar energy to fuel their abilities. Known Dakkamites include Wundarr the Aquarian and Quantum. They are indistinguishable from the DC Comics race, the Kryptonians and Daxamites.
Darbians - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A humanoid race that appears similarly to Earth humans, except that they average 8'10" in height. Their home planet is Darbia. They are able to generate and project concussive force.
D'Bari - See D'Bari.
Deonists - First appeared in Thor. A humanoid race with pale white skin and a slender build. Their homeworld, Deo was once the religious center of a confederation of planets and known as "Templeworld" but now called "the Doomsday Star" is 75% desert.
Druffs - First appeared in Fantastic Four. Druffs are timid creatures, averaging 3'6" in height and possessing pink skin covered by brown fur. They possess little more than childlike intelligence, and have the ability to reproduce by dividing into three identical beings whenever one is stuck with force. They have a lifespan of approximately three Earth-years, and are highly adaptable to most any environment. They originated on the world Ryas. They are considered to be vermin by the Skrulls, and are often slaughtered.


=== EEdit ===
Elan - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A semi-humanoid race, possessing green skin, two antennae atop their head, hoof-like feet, three fingers and an opposable thumb. Adult Elan 10' in height. They possess vast, virtually limitless psionic powers with which they can rearrange and transmute atoms and telekinetically manipulate objects. As a race, they are peaceful and tend not to associate with other aliens. The "Infant Terrible" is an infant member of the Elan race.
Entemen - First appeared in Marvel Presents. A humanoid race with octopus-like features, including tentacles in place of their arms and legs, and have yellow skin and average 6'6" in height. Their home planet is Entem.
Epsiloni - First appeared in Captain America. A humanoid race with pink-white skin, a fanged mouth, and toe-less spatulate feet. Epsiloni are parasites, draining life-force from other beings and gaining power from it. Their government was a fascist military dictatorship, and the Epsiloni were ruthless and regarded all other lifeforms as prey. Similar to Nazis.
Ergons - First appeared in Thor. A humanoid race with red skin, averaging 6'2" in height. They possess superhuman strength, an evolutionary adaptation to their homeworld's higher than normal gravity. Their culture is highly competitive, merciless, and adventurous. Their homeworld, Ergonar, has a gravity twice that of Earth's, is 50% covered in water (mostly ice) and the rest in mountains, and possesses a 90:10, oxygen:methane atmosphere.
Ethereals - First appeared in Annihilation: Heralds of Galactus. A non-humanoid race, the Ethereals are not composed of solid matter and believe that they are directly evolved from the elementary particles present when the universe was first created. The Ethereals do not normally interact with other races, referred to as "solids" or "corporeals", although the renegade Ethereal Stardust abandoned its race to serve Galactus. The race was almost exterminated by the Annihilation Wave. A handful of survivors escaped and confronted Stardust, who destroyed them and offered their essences as a gift to Galactus.


=== FEdit ===
Flb'Dbi - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A race of semi-arachnic type creatures 3'8" high, they have four arms and four legs which resemble tentacles. Flb'Dbi are telepathic and have lifespans of many thousands of Earth-years. They come from the planet Jhb'Btt. Half a million years ago, the Flb'Dbi had intermediate-level interstellar vessels; presumably today, they are far more advanced.
Fomalhauti - First appeared in Thor. A race of amoebic, amorphous blobs which average 2'5" in height, and are multi-cellular and can form tentacles to manipulate objects. They communicate telepathically. Fomalhauti come from the planet Pumor.
Fonabi - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A semi-humanoid race with light yellow skin that averages 16'5" in height with very squat, weak bodies. A Fonabi named Terminus utilizes a huge energy-transforming device to make him appear to be 150 feet (46 m) tall.
Fortisquians - First appeared in Adventure into Fear. Max is a Fortisquain.
Froma - First appeared in Tales of Suspense. A humanoid race with green skin, averaging 7'6" in height, they are able to levitate psionically. The Froma are ruled by corporations. Their home planet is Chize. The Froma once attempted to attack Earth but were repulsed by Iron Man.


=== GEdit ===
Galadorians - First appeared in Rom the Spaceknight. A humanoid race that appears almost identical to humans, except that they average 6'3" in height. They come from the planet Galador. Rom is a Galadorian.
Gegku - First appeared in Hercules. A race of semi-reptilian humanoids, the Gegku have green scaled skin and two-toed feet and average 6'6" in height. Their home planet is Wilamean. Although they have reptilian features, the gegku are actually mammalian.
Glx - A race of semi-humanoid silicon-based creatures, the Glx have mostly humanoid bodies that average 8' tall, but they have yellow skin and their heads are shaped more like flat cylinders. Their home planet is called Glxx, third from the sun in the Zplst star system in the Milky Way galaxy. A Glx named Chleee was responsible for transforming a chain into an "energy synthicon" which linked the criminals Hammer and Anvil together and gave them superhuman powers. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #182 (December 1974).
Grad Nan Holt - An alien race that is the slave race to the Shi'ar. First appeared in X-Men: Legacy #253
Gramosians - A humanoid race with blue-black skin that otherwise resembles humans physically, and are able to discharge energy through their hands. They come from the planet Gramos, third from the sun in the Sekar star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Years ago, the planet's magnetic polarity changed, admitting radiation from space which caused mass insanity and death until normalcy was restored by the debris of Xorr the God-Jewel. Mercurio the Fourth-Dimensional Man is a Gramosian. First seen in Thor #208 (February 1973).
Grosgumbeekians - A quadrupedal alien race from the planet Grosgumbeek. They are highly adapted for great speed. They can easily travel faster than the speed of sound (770 mph), and by accessing tachyon tunnels, they are not even constrained by the speed of light (186,000 miles/sec). They have no technology that has been seen. First seen in Quasar #47 (June 1993).
Grunds - A humanoid race that averages only 3'2" in height, Grunds have yellow skin and a paid of antennae atop their heads that absorb energy for concussive blasts. Their home planet is Grundar, fifth from the sun in the Quat star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The Grund named Grott the Man-Slayer was one of the agents of Korvac, the mad cyborg of 30th Century Earth. First seen in Giant-Size Defenders #3 (January 1975).
Guna - A reptilian-humanoid race that measures 5'6" tall on average, they have semi-scaled green skin with frontal plate-like formations. Their hands and feet are adapted for digging. They come from the planet Gunava, first from the sun in the Janoth star system in the Andromeda galaxy. They have a planetwide technocratic dictatorship, and their technology is advanced to the point of interstellar travel and vast solar energy converters. The Guna were in danger of extinction due to the dwindling of their sun. First seen in Tales of Suspense #55 (July 1964).


=== HEdit ===
H'ylthri - H'ylthri are an other-dimensional, sentient plant race. Their bodies are vegetable fiber with few vital organs, making them difficult to injure. They possess superhuman strength to an unspecified level, can control other plant life, and extend both tangling vines or poisonous barbs to knock mammals unconscious. They can grow humanoid doppelgangers with the originals' personality and memories. First seen in Iron Fist #2
Herms - A race of whale-like creatures with yellow-white skin that can absorb all manner of electromagnetic energy for strength and substance, which can also allow them to briefly transform into beings of pure energy; they can apparently travel through intergalactic space in energy form. Klaatu is a Herm. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #136 (February 1971).
Hibers - A humanoid race with a similar appearance to Earth humans, except that they are all entirely hairless. Their home planet is Hiberlac, sixth from the sun in the Hunyoc star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They spend their entire lives in suspended animation, coming out only once every thousand years when the planet thaws. First seen in Rom #67 (June 1985).
Hodinns - The Hodinns are one of the many alien races that were integrated into the Shi'ar Empire. First appeared in New X-Men #124.
Hodomurians - An alien race. Century is a Hodomurian.
Horusians - A humanoid race with brown or yellow skin, that averages 7' tall. They come from the planet Horus IV in the Horus star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Using machines, they can simulate psionic powers, and disguise themselves as the native gods of whatever planet they visit in order to inspire awe. When they visited Earth, they wore masks to make them resemble the gods of Heliopolis. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #145 (November 1971).
Hujah - A race that resembles giant green serpents with an average of 16'4" in length. The Hujah live on the planet Huj, seventeenth from the sun in the Zuccone star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They have psychokinetic powers that compensate for their lack of arms. First seen in Avengers Annual #7 (1977).


=== IEdit ===
Interdites - A humanoid race with blue skin, they have developed precognition as well as other psionic powers. They come from the planet Interdis, seventh from the sun in the Tartaru star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Their civilization was demolished by the Badoon, and surviving Interdites have turned to mysticism and live like hermits scattered across the galaxy. First seen in Warlock #15 (November 1974).
Iron Knights - A humanoid race with red skin and dark hair, they have weapons, armor and technology that appears identical to that of European knights of the late Middle Ages. They are also immensely strong, so much so that even an adolescent boy can easily overpower the Incredible Hulk. The knights come from another dimension that the Hulk accessed through the Crossroads in Incredible Hulk, vol 1, #302. They share their world, which is called Paradise, with the Greens, a green-skinned humanoid race who are much weaker but have powerful magic, and with an orange skinned race of dwarves.


=== JEdit ===
Jovians - A race of genetically engineered humans who live on the planet Jupiter. Charlie-27 is a Jovian. They first appeared in Marvel Super-Heroes #18 (Jan. 1969).
Judans - Judans' bodies are 12' tall on average and consist of an oval-shaped trunk with enormous facial features, four arms, and two legs; they support this weight by generating psychokinetic force from their enormous brains. Their home planet is Dyofor, second from the sun in the Palyn star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Judge Kray-Tor is a Judan. First seen in Strange Tales #180 (June 1975).


=== KEdit ===
K'aitian - A humanoid race with green skin, for the most part identical to humans. They are a primitive people native to the planet K'ai in the microverse, and were ruled over by Jarella for a time. The first appeared in issue #140 of the incredible Hulk.
K'Lanti - A humanoid race with pale skin, featureless eyes and the ability to levitate. They dress regally, favoring long flowing robes and ornate chest-pieces. They were wracked with civil war, until the retrieval of an object called the Harmonium, which played music that they found greatly pleasing. Despite having gained the object which would restore peace, they still attempted to kill those, Lila Cheney and X-Factor, who ultimately retrieved it. First seen in X-Factor #111 (February 1995).
Kallusians - A humanoid race with deep pink skin, with white or gray hair. Kallusians come from the planet Kallu, third from the sun in the Kallu-Kan star system in the Andromeda galaxy. The Avengers drove a group of Kallusians from their temporary refuge in Earth's Arctic for a distant section of the galaxy where they would again battle the aliens who first drove them from Kallu. First seen in Avengers #14 (March 1965).
Kamado - A humanoid race with an exaggeratedly muscular physique. Their home planet is Mikkaz, seventh from the sun in the Dopner star system in the Milky Way galaxy. In an alternate 20th Century, the Defenders, while investigating a UFO sighting, inadvertently caused the son of the Kamado king and his followers to commit suicide. In response, when the Kamado king found their remains four hundred years later, he ordered the annihilation of Earth. To prevent this occurrence from coming about, the original Defenders team disbanded. First seen in Defenders #125 (November 1983).
Karidians - The Karidians are a race of aliens from the planet Karidia. Their planet was saved from their dying unstable sun by Silver Surfer. First appeared in Silver Surfer Vol. 3 #103.
Kawa - A reptilian semi-humanoid race with orange skin that averages 10' in height. They come from the planet Kawa in the Bawa Kawa star system in the Andromeda galaxy. After Galactus destroyed their planet, the Kawa began to worship him as their god and even lead him to sacrificial planets. First seen in Hercules #3 (November 1982).
Kigor - The Kigors are a race of crab-like aliens from Cancrius III. First appeared in Tales of Suspense #14.
Klklk - An insectoid race covered with chitinous carapaces that averages 8' in length from head to end of tail. Their homeworld is La'kll, fourth from the sun in the Tl'blk star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They have antennae which can project disintegrating blasts. Klklk can exude thin but strong web-like filaments, and queens have demonstrated telepathy. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #273 (July 1982).
Kodabaks - A humanoid pig-like race with two digits on each appendage, averaging 6'2" in height. They come from the planet Kodaba, seventh from the sun in the Grosgumbique star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Thanos recruited some Kodabaks to serve in his army, and they battled the Avengers aboard Sanctuary II. First seen in Marvel Two-In-One Annual #2 (1977).
Korbinites - A humanoid race with light orange skin, averaging 6'2" in height, and originating in the so-called "Burning Galaxy." Beta Ray Bill is a Korbinite. However, Bill has been greatly genetically modified; normal Korbinites are bald and without noses and ears, while Bill has an equine face and pure-white eyes. First seen in Thor #337 (November 1983).
Kosmosians - A semi-reptilian race with similarities to multi-cellular amoeboids, with bodies that can "flow" as they move, thereby changing their length, which is 50' on average. Kosmosians come from the planet Kosmos, fifth from the sun in the Zokka star system, in the Milky Way galaxy. They have limited telepathic abilities which cause victims to be hypnotized into ceasing to live. Dr. Vernon van Dyne, father of Janet van Dyne once summoned a Kosmosian to Earth, which killed him. Henry Pym drove the creature away from Earth. First seen in Tales to Astonish #44 (June 1963).
Kronans - A semi-humanoid race, also known as "the Stone Men of Saturn," whose orange bodies are silicon-based and 8' tall on average, with thick, virtually impenetrable stone-like hides. Their home planet is Ria, first from the sun in the Krona star system in the Milky Way galaxy. As revealed in WWH: Aftersmash: Warbound #4, Kronans reproduce when two males join hands to melt part of their bodies together, creating an infant Kronan when the two break apart; it is not known if there are any female Kronans; if not, this means they are in fact genderless. The most notable Kronan has been the Hulk's ally Korg. First seen (as the Stone Men from Saturn) in Journey into Mystery #83 (August 1962). They will also appear in the Thor: The Dark World
Krylorians - A semi-humanoid race from the planet Krylor, third from the sun in the Aceta star system in the Andromeda galaxy. Krylorians have an extremely high level of technology, with advanced interstellar ships powered and guided psionically. They are also advanced in molecular-scale manipulation, transmutation, and robotics. First seen in Incredible Hulk #269 (March 1982). Bereet, a Krylorian that Star-Lord has forgotten is aboard on his ship, appears in the 2014 movie Guardians of the Galaxy.
Kt'kn - A semi-insectoid race with 2" spherical bodies with six spindly legs. They come from the planet Kn'kn, first from the sun in the Tk'kn star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They can communicate telepathically and have psionic senses rather than physical ones. The Faceless One is a member of this race. First seen in Astonishing Tales #2 (October 1970).
Kymellians - See Kymellian. First seen in Power Pack #1 (August 1984).


=== LEdit ===
Lava Men of Molto - First seen in Journey into Mystery #97, (of Jinku and his tribe) in Avengers #5, (of the tribe beneath Project Pegasus) Avengers #236.
Laxidazians - A humanoid race with pointed ears, which average 4'5" in height. They come from the planet Laxidazia, fourth from the sun in the Dolenz star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The hedonistic Laxidazians imbibe an illegal alcoholic and mutagenic beverage which permanently transforms them into trolls. Pip the Troll is a Laxidazian. First seen in Strange Tales #179 (April 1975).
Lem - A semi-serpentine race with red skin that averages 4'9" in height. They come from the planet Lemista, sixth from the sun in the Atianti star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Lem eat through special mouths in their chest. They have tails instead of legs but can stand and traverse in a semi-upright position. First seen in Shogun Warriors #19 (August 1980).
Levians - A humanoid race with blue skin that otherwise looks very similar to Earth humans. Surviving Levians live aboard the "world-ship" Levianon. Their homeworld Levia was destroyed as they depleted the planet of magma and resources. First seen in Thor #256 (February 1977).
Lumina - A humanoid race that stands 5'5" in height on average, and appears just about identical to humans. They come from the planet Lumin, ninth from the sun in the Sh'Mengi star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They have average lifespans of thousands of years. They are members of the federation of alien races called the Charter (along with the Lem, Myndai, and Nanda). First seen in Shogun Warriors #1 (February 1979).
Luphomoids - Nebula and Spirit are Luphomoids.


=== MEdit ===
M'Hassians - The M'Hassians are an alien race from the planet M'Hass. First appeared in Thor Vol. 2 #22.
Majesdanians - First seen in Runaways (vol.1) #1. The Majesdianians are able to absorb and project solar energy. They are enemies of the Skrulls and are at war with them. Their home world is hidden under the guise of a white dwarf star and have remained hidden from attack for years. Karolina Dean is a Majesdanian.
Makluans - A race of reptilians with green skin that average 32' in height when upright. They come from the planet Maklu-IV - also known as Kakaranathara - in the Maklu star system, in the Milky Way galaxy. It is known to have a highly advanced and peaceful society. Fin Fang Foom is a Makluan. His race, or at least a small faction of it, invaded China more or less by accident when their spaceship crashed, but he was (eventually) put to sleep by narcotic herbs. First seen in Tales of Suspense #62 (February 1965) and then Strange Tales (vol.1) #89. In New Excalibur #12 it is revealed that Makluans invaded Camelot around the same time, and possibly other places as well. From Axonn-Karr of Maklu-4, another crew member of the ship Fin Fang Foom arrived on, the Mandarin was able to acquire his rings of power before setting up his base in the Valley of Spirits in China.
Mandos - A race of humanoids with green skin, averaging 9'1" in height. They come from the planet Mand, eight from the sun in the Tumbia star system in the Andromeda galaxy. Mando skin is capable of withstanding the vacuum of space, and Mandos are superhumanly strong. First seen in Warlock #15 (November 1976).
Martians - Earth-616 has the most varied amount of beings termed as "Martians" as any other reality in the multiverse. Likely for the reasons cited above. However, many of these different races have yet to be classified. First appeared in Marvel Mystery Comics #3.
Marvanites - A semi-humanoid race with oversized craniums and green skin, averaging 40' in height. They come from the planet Marvan, fifth from the sun in the Mawnolf star system. They have psionic abilities which allow them to overcome the pull of gravity on their huge bodies and levitate themselves; their psionics also allow them to project destructive force beams from their eyes and to self-teleport. First seen in Marvel Two-in-One Annual #3 (1978).
Megans - A semi-reptilian, semi-humanoid race with red skin, oversized ears, and suction cups at the end of each digit. They live on the planet Mega, third from the sun, in the Mirpet star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The people of Mega were engaged in centuries in a war with the neighboring planet Beta. First seen in Godzilla #12 (July 1978).
Mekkans - A race of semi-humanoid robots with superhuman strength. They come from the planet Mekka, second from the sun in the Kirthom star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Their planet was originally called Maarin, after the humanoids who lived there. They built the Mekkans as servants, but after the Maarin were all killed by an extraplanetary spore virus, the Mekkans took control of the planet. Torgo was from Mekka. First seen in Fantastic Four #91 (October 1969).
Mephitisoids - A race of humanoids with feline (originally skunk-like) characteristics, they have night vision, retractable claws, and acute olfactory senses. They come from the planet Tryl'sart, third from the sun in the Cyrane Om'lr star system in the Shi'Ar galaxy. They communicate using pheromones. Hepzibah of the Starjammers is a Mephitisoid. Male Mephitisoids, who are extremely rare now, are capable of exuding pheromones that can subject almost any humanoid that breathes them in to their will. First seen in X-Men #107 (October 1977).
Mercurians - A race of the planet Mercury. Niki is from the planet Mercury. They first appeared in Marvel Presents #4 (Apr. 1976).
Microns - Are inhabitants of Ithaka in the Homeworld region from the sub-atomic universe. First seen in Micronauts #1
M'Ndavians - A semi-humanoid race with yellow skin and oversized, diamond-shaped heads, averaging 6'3" in height. They possess highly advanced intellects. They live on the planet M'Ndavi, tenth from the sun in the B'lbwo star system in the Shi'ar galaxy. they have the most complex legal system in the known galaxies and are used by the Shi'ar for matters of great significance to the empire. A M'Ndavian served as the judge at the trial of Mister Fantastic (who was tried for saving the life of Galactus). First seen in Fantastic Four #262 (January 1984).
Mobians - A humanoid race with orange skin and hair, averaging 8' in height. They come from the planet Mobius, eleventh from the sun in the Lemivell star system in the Andromeda Galaxy. they have the ability to survive for short periods in the vacuum of space. A Mobian named Xeron "the Star-Slayer" was a harpooner aboard the starship Andromeda when the ship encountered the Hulk. First seen in Incredible Hulk #136 (February 1971).
Morani - A semi-humanoid race with green skin and hair, averaging 19'6" in height. Some Morani possess the ability to project bioelectric energy. Morani come from the planet Moran, fourth from the sun in the Jark star system in the Andromeda galaxy. A party of Morani once attacked one of the Watchers. First seen in Tales of Suspense #58 (October 1964).
Myndai - A humanoid race which appears very similar to Earth humans. The Myndai were once members of the federation of alien races called the Charter (along with the Lem, Lumina, and Nanda). They were engaged in a galaxy-wide war with the Lumina, and some were placed on Earth in suspended animation eons ago as sleeper agents. First seen in Shogun Warriors #1 (February 1979).


=== NEdit ===
Nanda - A semi-humanoid race with light green skin and large ovular heads, which average 6' in height. They come from the planet Nanda, second from the sun in the Particulus star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They are members of the federation of alien races called the Charter (along with the Lem, Lumina, and Myndai). First seen in Shogun Warriors #19 (August 1980).
Nuwali - First seen in Ka-Zar the Savage #34. Created the Savage Land for the Beyonders. They appear like hunched-over reptilians with massive, boxy trunks and short limbs.
Nymenians - A humanoid hippopotamus-like race with light purple skin that averages 6'4" in height. Their home planet is Eomuma, fourth from the sun in the Myunimo star system in the Andromeda galaxy. They live in tribal clans. First seen in Hercules #1 (September 1982).


=== OEdit ===
Oobagonians - The Oobagonians are a race of aliens from Oobagon VIII. Their over-sized faces resemble tiki masks of the Maori Tribe of Earth. In fact, at least one Oobagonian has been mistaken for wearing a mask when in fact he wasn't. First appeared in Journey Into Mystery #60.
Ovoids - A semi-humanoid race with oversized, oval-shaped heads and yellow skin, and are 8' in height on average. They come from the planet Birkeel, third from the sun in the Janstak star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They are capable of levitating objects psionically, and are capable of mind transfer. When they are about to die, they transfer their minds into apparently inanimate bodies that have been prepared for them. The Ovoids once rescued Doctor Doom, and were responsible for teaching him the mind transfer technique. He claims they were so advanced they trusted every other living thing. The Ovoids were also responsible for the death of the original Air-Walker. First seen in Fantastic Four #10 (January 1963).


=== PEdit ===
Pegasusians - A reptilian race with light green skin that average 20' in height. They live on the planet Lar, fifth from the sun in the Stinlar star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Pegasusians can psionically project anti-gravitons to support their large mass in high gravities. A Pegasusian named Sphinxor was contracted by the Beyonders to tow Counter-Earth to their museum. First seen in Strange Tales #178 (February 1975).
Pheragots - A semi-humanoid race with light blue skin that averages 10' in height. They come from the planet Arago-7 in the Arago star system in the Andromeda galaxy. They have extraordinary superhuman strength due in part to their dense molecular structure. First seen in Hercules #1 (September 1982).
Plodex - The Plodex are an entirely non-humanoid race and are shapeless blobs in their natural form. They are able to adapt to forms capable of creating and manipulating their technology. Marrina of Alpha Flight is a member of the Plodex race. First seen in Alpha Flight #1 (August 1983).
Pluvians - A race of aliens from the planet Pluto. First appeared in Sub-Mariner Comics #38.
Procyonites - A reptilian race with a large brown tortoise-like shell and brown scales, 6'5" in height on average. They come from the planet Perratin, second from the sun in the Procyon star system in the Milky Way galaxy. A Procyonite named Tork was among the minions of Korvac in the 30th Century. First seen in Thor Annual #6 (1977).
Prosilicans - First seen in Tales of Suspense #53. The race who inspired the Watchers' oath of non-interference - they destroyed themselves in a nuclear war after having been given the secret of atomic energy by the Watchers' well-meaning ancestors.
Poppupians - A semi-humanoid race with light green skin that is able to assume virtually any form within a certain range of mass. Poppupians can also levitate and traverse interstellar space without starships, and they reproduce asexually by massive cell division. Galactus destroyed their home planet of Poppup. The Impossible Man is a Poppupian. First seen in Fantastic Four #11 (February 1963).


=== QEdit ===
Queega - A race of reptilian semi-humanoids with green scaled skin that average 6' tall. Their home planet is Queeg, fourth from the sun in the Quolan star system in the Andromeda galaxy. They can generate electrical energy around their heads, and they breathe and speak through small orifices in their foreheads. They can project intense waves of coldness from their foreheads. A band of Queega once used a "sight-stealing ray" to attempt to blind all of Earth's humans. First seen in Daredevil #28 (May 1967).
Quists - A humanoid race which appears very similar to Earth humans, except that they are 6'5" tall on average. Their home planet is Quistalium, second from the sun in the Quistraa star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Lucifer is a Quist, and Dominus was created by Quists. First seen in Tales of Suspense #56 & X-Men #20 (May 1966).
Quo Modari - A purple-skinned semi-humanoid race, that stands over 6' tall and has four eyes. They are a pacifist race that was dedicated to the arts of diplomacy and the inter-species community. First seen in Force Works #13
Quons - A semi-humanoid race with leathery brown skin that averages 6'4" tall. They come from the planet Quon, third from the sun in the Byjak star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They are amphibious, possessing both lungs and gills. They are superhumanly strong, to survive both great water pressure and their planet's gravity. First seen in Fantastic Four #97 (April 1970).
Qwrlln - First seen in Alpha Flight #25.


=== REdit ===
Rajaks - A semi-humanoid race with green skin, averaging 6' tall. Their home planet is Rajak, fifth from the sun in the Jakkel star system. Their society consists of confederacies of large space piracy organizations, which wipe out all life on a planet with their "delta-ray" cannon, in order to plunder them of valuable elements. Many Rajaki were destroyed by Ultimo when he razed their planet. Sapper, partner to Goldenblade, is a cybernetically converted Rajak. First seen in Tales of Suspense #57 (September 1964).
Recorders - A race of robotic life-forms created by the Rigellians. The Recorders are generally used as scouts to explore new territory and report back to the Rigellians. Recorders are occasionally seen assisting various cosmic entities - for instance, one of them once lived at Uatu the Watcher's home-place at the Blue Area of the Earth's Moon and observed the apparent death of Jean Grey as Phoenix. Another Recorder, RT-Z9, works for the Living Tribunal's Magistrati, more specifically She-Hulk.
Reptoids - A reptilian race with green scaled skin, and a snake-like head and tail, they are 6' tall on average when standing erect. Their home planet is Tayp, second from the sun in the Kormuk star system in the Milky Way galaxy. A Reptoid named Teju served as a minion of Korvac in the 30th Century. First seen in Thor Annual #6 (1977).
Rhunians - A race of humanoids that resemble Earth humans with pointed ears, but are about 300 ft. tall on average. They come from the planet Rhun, in the Vulliger star system. They are capable of deriving energy through destroying stars and other planets. First seen in Thor #219 (January 1974).
Rigellians - Also known as the Colonizers of Rigel, the Rigellians are a scientifically and technologically advanced alien race devoted towards amassing an empire via colonization.
R'malk'i - A race of plant creatures,. They resemble trees with humanoid arms, and average 6'8" in height. They live on the planet R'makl'z, in the C'lehr'ee star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They communicate telepathically, and are mobile but must take root in their native soil when asleep. First seen in Warlock #15 (November 1976).
Roclites - A semi-humanoid race with reddish-brown to dark brown skin, they average 8' tall. They come from the planet Rocklon, fifth from the sun in the Tarl star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The Blood Brothers are Roclites. First seen in Iron Man #55 (February 1973).
Ruul - Actually an evolved form of Kree. First seen in Maximum Security: Dangerous Planet #1.
R'zahnians - A humanoid race with red skin. They come from the planet R'zahn, second from the sun in the Lahj'kk star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They have a planetwide monarchy. A R'zahnian named Zamu was sent as an advance scout to infiltrate Earth, but he was defeated by Doctor Druid. First seen in Weird Wonder Tales #20 (January 1977).


=== SEdit ===
Sagittarians - A humanoid race with grey skin, standing 6'2" on average, Male Saggitarians have fins atop their heads. They originate from the planet Berhert, third from the sun in the Rempit star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #111 (January 1969).
Sakaarans - A race of aliens from the planet Sakaar. First appeared in Incredible Hulk Vol. 2 #92.
Sarks - A humanoid race with light blue skin, standing 6'1" on average. They come from the planet Sarka, third from the sun in the Tilnast star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Sarks were among the highest officials in the Universal Church of Truth. Captain Autolycus is a Sark. First seen in Strange Tales #179 (April 1975).
Saurids - A race of amphibious reptilian bipeds with both lungs and gills, Saurids have green scaled skin with yellow fins. Their home planet is Timor, fourth from the sun in the Varanus star system, in the Shi'ar galaxy. Ch'od of the Starjammers is a Saurid. First seen in X-Men #107 (October 1977).
Scatter - First seen in Force Works #1. An insect-like hive minds inhabiting humanoid shells.
Scy'ar Tal - Once known as the M'kraan, the only thing known about this mysterious race is that they arrived on the planet where the M'kraan Crystal is located and conquered the alien race living there. Their race was later itself decimated by the Shi'ar, the surviving members flee to other space and changed their name, culture and society to the destruction of the Shi`ar Empire. As a sidenote Scy'ar Tal literally means "Death to the Shi'ar". First appeared in X-Men: Emperor Vulcan #1 (September 2007).
Sidri - See Sidri. First seen in X-Men #154 (February 1982).
Sirians - A humanoid race appearing identical to Earth humans, the Sirians are ruled by a dictatorship. They inhabit both their home planet of Sirius III and a colony on Sirius IV in the Sirius star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The Sirians were conquered by the Quists, and a Sirian named Ixar came to Earth with the intent of conquest using his giant androids called Ultroids, but was repulsed by the Avengers. First seen in Avengers #36 (January 1967) & X-Men #21 (June 1966).
Siris - A semi-octopus race with ten fingered tentacles and light green skin, averaging 6' in height (not including the tentacles). They come from the planet Yormot, second from the sun in the Sirius star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The Mutant Master was a Siris. First seen in X-Men #37 (October 1967) (disguised as humanoid) & X-Men #39 (true form revealed).
Sirusites - A humanoid race that appears virtually indistinguishable from Earth humans. They live on the planet Sirus X, in the Al'Ma'an star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Sirus X is the Holy Planet of the galaxy-wide Universal Church of Truth theocratic empire. First seen in Strange Tales #179 (April 1975).
Sleepwalkers - A race of beings that patrols the Mindscape, a parallel dimension that connects the minds of all living beings, to protect those minds from the invasions of monsters and demons. Physically, they resemble gaunt humanoids with long limbs, olive-green skin, and red compound eyes. One of these entities became trapped in the mind of university student Rick Sheridan, and gained the ability to manifest on Earth whenever Rick slept, becoming a superhero. First seen in Sleepwalker #1.
Sligs - A race of brown insectoid non-humanoids with eight tentacle-like limbs, the front limbs of which can be used for grasping and manipulating objects. Sligs have telepathic powers, and can levitate themselves. They come from the planet Ankara, sixth from the sun in the Ryneb star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in Fantastic Four #209 (August 1979).
Sm'ggani - A semi-insectoid race with orange skin and a brown shell that averages 7'2" tall. They have suction disks on their fingers and feet and superhuman strength; some can alter the density of part or all of their bodies so that they can pass through other solid objects. They come from the planet M'ggani, fifth from the sun in the T'letio star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in The Incredible Hulk #230 (December 1978).
Sneepers - A semi-humanoid race with green skin that averages 5'8" tall. They come from the planet Sneep, fourth from the sun in the Snuup star system in the Milky Way galaxy. The Sneepers have built a small interplanetary empire and intend to rule the entire galaxy someday. First seen in Tales of Suspense #49 (January 1964).
Solons - A race of humanoids with blue skin that averages 9' in height. They home planet is Solon, fourth from the sun in the Nardea star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They are a race of purpose-bred clones with psionic powers. A Solon named Spinnerette encountered the Fantastic Four. First seen in Fantastic Four #237 (December 1981).
Space Phantom - The servants of Immortus, the Master of Time. For many years it was assumed that there was only one Space Phantom, but in the course of the Destiny War the Avengers discovered that there was more than one. During a journey back in time to 1873, a trio of Space Phantoms was caught impersonating the Gunhawks and the Black Rider. The Space Phantoms were previously said to have originated on the planet Phantus, in the Phalbo system in the Milky Way Galaxy.
Spartoi - The human-like species of Star-Lord. First seen in Marvel Preview #4
Sssth - A reptilian semi-humanoid race with green skin, and a mane of red, yellow, or orange hair, Sssth are 8' tall on average. They come from the planet Sszardil, second from the sun in the Sslirteep star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in Thor #212 (June 1973).
Stark - See Stark.
Stenth - A semi-humanoid race with yellow skin that stands 5'10" on average. They come from the planet Stent, fifth from the sun in the Duggil star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in Inhumans #7 (October 1976).
Stonians - A race of winged humanoids with a gargoyle-like appearance and skin of green, orange, yellow, brown, or grey; most are 6' tall, although some grow up to 25 times that. Stonians inhabit the planets Stonus I through Stonus V in the Stonus star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in Astonishing Tales #21 (December 1973).
Strontians - Gladiator of the Shi'ar Imperial Guard is a Strontian. First seen in X-Men #107.


=== TEdit ===
Taurians - A semi-humanoid race with orange skin that averages 7' in height. Their home planet of Taur in the Jenzen star system in the Milky Way galaxy was destroyed by Galactus. A few Taurians escaped and now live aboard starships with other aliens who lost their planets to Galactus called The Wanderers. The Taurian named Kehl served Nebula. First seen in Thor #160 (January 1969).
Technarchy - The Technarchy, or Technarch', are a cybernetic, shape shifting alien species. Its most notable members are the New Mutants member Warlock and Magus. They are a race of giant techno-organic entities with very aggressive natures. They travel the universe looking for things on which to feed, which can be organic or mechanical. They feed by infecting their prey with the Transmode Virus, converting it into techno-organic matter, from which they then drain the energy.
Tektons - A semi-humanoid race covered with purple fur, averaging 6'2" in height. They come from the planet Tekton, ninth from the sun in the Tacuspar star system in the Andromeda galaxy. These savage primitives have superhuman strength and prehensile tails. First seen in Fantastic Four #91 (October 1969).
Thuvrians - A race of humanoids with oversized heads, averaging 6'1" in height. Their home planet is Thuvria, third from the sun in the Lomyra star system in the Milky Way galaxy. As of 200 years ago, their development was arrested at a level comparable to the European Middle Ages. First seen in Rom the Spaceknight #19 (June 1981).
Tribbitites - A race of semi-humanoid reptilians with scaled orange skin, Tribbities, or "Toad Men," as they are commonly called, are 5' tall on average. They originated on the planet Kroke, but built on the artificial world of Tribbit (or "Toadworld") from stolen Kree plans to use as the capital of the Tribbitite Empire. A Tribbitite has a long sticky tongue which can be extended, like an Earth toad's. They have advanced technology stolen from other races, and specialize in powerful magnetic technology, which can even move the moon. First seen in Incredible Hulk #2 (July 1962). They kidnap Bruce Banner to learn how advanced Earth is, but he uses a gamma ray device to disrupt They appear as Toad Men in The Marvel Super Heroes.
Tribunals - Beings of sentient energy that can take on whatever physical form they desire. They possess untold psionic energy-manipulative abilities, and are even capable of moving objects through time. The Tribunals once summoned the original Defenders before them in order to persuade them to permanently disband. First seen in Defenders #124 (October 1983).
Troyjans - A race of warlords who conquered galaxies. Arm'Cheddon commands the squadron of conquerors. Currently he is stuck in the Dark Dimension. First seen in Incredible Hulk #413 (January 1994).
Tsiln - A race of semi-reptilian anthropoids, with both reptilian and mammalian characteristics, with orange scaled skin, and average 300' in height. They come from the planet Broi, second from the sun in the Wyllys star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Gog is a Tsiln. First seen in The Amazing Spider-Man #103 (December 1971).
Tsyrani - A humanoid race with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot. They come from the planet Tsorcherhi, third from the sun in the Ella star system in the Shi'ar galaxy. They are ruled by a matriarchal monarchy under supervision of the Shi'ar Empire. First seen in Spider-Woman #36 (March 1981).


=== UEdit ===
Uncreated - Once called "the Works", the Uncreated are warlike and seek the extermination of all religions and religious species. Slightly larger and stronger than humans, they have claws and are covered with quills. Uncreated are capable of communicating with humans, but it is unclear whether this is through speech or some form of telepathy. The Uncreated claim that they did not evolve naturally, but were instead created by a powerful creature which they worshipped as a god.
Ul'lula'ns - A race of Shapeshifting race with powerful mental abilities, their natural form resembles a giant tentacled fish. Their home planet is Ul'lula, second from the sun in the Ul star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Nebulon and Supernalia are Ul'lula'ns. First seen in Defenders #13 (May 1974).


=== VEdit ===
Vegans - A humanoid race that stands 30' tall on average. Vegans continually radiate anti-gravitons from areas of their brains contained within two horn-like projections on the front of their skulls in order to support their vast bulk. Their home planet is Vega Superior, fourth from the sun in the Vega star system in the Milky Way galaxy. A Vegan named Agent 7M, the Colossus, attempted to conquer Earth but was thwarted by Giant-Man. First seen in Tales to Astonish #58 (August 1964).
Vorms - A reptilian race with red scaled skin that averages 16'6" in height. Their home planet is Vormir, sixth from the sun in the Helgentar star system in the Kree galaxy (Greater Magellanic Cloud). Each Vorm has a long tail that can be used as a weapon. Vorms are nocturnal and are vulnerable to great heat. The Star-Stalker, a Vorm mutant, possessed powers that other Vorms lack, such as the ability to fly through space and drain energy. First seen in Avengers #123 (May 1974).
Vrellnexians - An insectoid race that usually has purple skin, and stands 5'5" on average. They come from the planet Vrellnex, fifth from the sun in the Cetsin star system in the Milky Way galaxy. They stand on their hindmost pair of limbs, and have two sets of arms. They differ widely in appearance; some are winged and can fly. First seen in Thor #212 (June 1973).


=== WEdit ===
Wilameanis - A humanoid race that appears very similarly to Earth humans, averaging 5'4" in height. They come from the planet Wilamean, fifth from the sun in the Yalnot star system in the Andromeda galaxy. In the 22nd Century, Wilameanis dun Starharbor, a popular spaceport. First seen in Hercules #2 (October 1982).
Wobbs - A semi-humanoid race that possess telepathic abilities enabling them to understand any auditory language and translate it telepathically to other nearby sentient organisms. They have light purple skin, and are 5'1" on average. Their homeworld is Wobb-Lar, second from the sun in the Filipima star system in the Andromeda galaxy. First seen in Incredible Hulk #137 (March 1971).


=== XEdit ===
Xandarians - First seen in Nova #1. Human-like species surviving on four conjoined asteroids, the only remains of their homeworld. Founders of the Nova Corps.
Xantareans - A reptilian humanoid race with red scaled skin that stands 7'5" on average. They are amphibious. Their home planet is Xantar, second from the sun in the Xantares star system in the Milky Way galaxy. First seen in Tales to Astonish #73 (November 1965).
Xantha - A semi-humanoid race with pale yellow skin that stands 4'6" on average. They originate from the planet Xanth (aka Planet X), which was destroyed in a collision with a rogue asteroid. With the help of Mister Fantastic, the survivors established a new home planet of New Xanth, first from the sun in the New Jatskan star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Kurrgo is a Xantha. First seen in Fantastic Four #7 (October 1962).
Xartans - A race of Shapeshifting species capable of detailed duplication of living or non-living subjects. They come from the planet Xarta, fourth from the sun in the Zugano star system in the Fornax galaxy. In their true forms, Xartans have orange skin and average 6'9" in height. First seen (as the Carbon-Copy Men) in Journey into Mystery #90 (March 1963).
Xeronians - A semi-humanoid race with orange skin that averages 6'8" in height. They come from the planet Xeron, second from the sun in the triple star system containing Aerim, Honj, and Verserin, in the Milky Way galaxy. Xeronians have five eyes, but use only two adjacent eyes at the same time. First seen in Incredible Hulk #103 (May 1968).
Xixix - A semi-humanoid race with red skin that averages 5'9" in height. They come from the planet Xix, which was in the Xaravaran stary system in the Milky Way galaxy until destroyed by Galactus. The Xixix survivors joined the wandering fleet of starships bearing many members of the many alien races whose home worlds were destroyed by Galactus. First seen in Fantastic Four #261 (December 1983).


=== YEdit ===
Yirbek - A race of humanoid reptilians with green skin that averages 6'7" in height. Their home planet is Yirb, second from the sun in the Bek star system in the Andromeda galaxy. The Yirbeks governed a small empire in the Skrull galaxy until the Skrulls defeated them centuries ago. First seen in Avengers #14 (March 1965).
Yrds - A semi-humanoid race with green skin that stands 6'2" on average. They come from the planet Yrest, third from the sun in the Corinum star system in the Draco galaxy. Each Yrd has a 1' long horn protruding from its forehead that could be used as a weapon. First seen in Tales of Suspense #54 (June 1964).


=== ZEdit ===
Zenn-Lavians - A human-like species, later described as a pacifist offshoot of the Kree. Their planet, Zenn-La is third from the sun in the Deneb star system in the Milky Way galaxy. Silver Surfer was a Zenn-Lavian. First seen in Silver Surfer #1 (August 1968).
Zen-Whoberis - Gamora is a Zenn-Whoberi.
Z'nox - A race of reptilians with brown skin that averages 6'1" in height. They come from the planet Z'nox, second from the sun in the Huz'deyr star system in the Andromeda galaxy. They are ruled by a planetwide military dictatorship. They once attacked Earth, but were repelled by the X-Men; a later attack via biological warfare was repelled by Spider-Man during the Maximum Security storyline. First seen in X-Men #65 (February 1970).
Zn'rx - See Zn'rx.
Zundamites - First appeared in Fantastic Four. A semi-humanoid race with pale yellow skin that stands 11'8" tall on average. Their home planet is Zundam. They have the ability to survive in virtually any environment without a special apparatus. A Zundamite served as herald to Terminus.


== ReferencesEdit ==

Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe: Deluxe Edition #15: "Wonder Man to Zzzax plus Appendix to Alien races" (March 1987)


== External linksEdit ==
Alien Races at MarvelDirectory.com
Races at marvunapp.com
Marvel's Alien Races at ComicBoards.com