The title Defense minister, Minister for Defence, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of State for Defence, Secretary of National Defense or some similar variation, is assigned to the person in a cabinet position in charge of a Ministry of Defence, which regulates the armed forces in sovereign states. The role of a defence minister varies considerably from country to country; in some the minister is only in charge of general budget matters and procurement of equipment; while in others the minister is also, in addition, an integral part of the operational military chain of command.
Prior to the 20th century, there were in most countries separate ministerial posts for the land forces (often called "minister for war" etc.) and the naval forces. Since the end of World War II, the title has changed from war to defence, and has often involved putting a single defence minister in charge of all the armed forces. Another common reform which occurred at the end of World War II was to place the defence minister in a national security council, war cabinet, or a "Kitchen Cabinet", which allows the head of government or head of state to coordinate military, diplomatic and economic activities.
The Defence Ministry in some countries is a very important ministry, sometimes considered more important than the foreign ministry. If war is common for a country, the defence minister's position is often assumed by the head of government. (For example, five Prime Ministers of Israel have held the Defence (Security) Ministry during their Premiership). In many nations it is a strong convention that the defence minister be a civilian, in order to highlight civilian control over the military, though it's not uncommon for the defence minister to have some military experience. In less democratic countries, the minister is often an active military official.


== People's Republic of China ==
The People's Republic of China is very unusual in that the Ministry of National Defence (MND) is relatively powerless; it does not have command over the People's Liberation Army. Command of the military belongs in the party and in the state Central Military Commission; the MND exists primarily as a liaison and protocol office to communicate with foreign militaries. Essentially, the MND exists only because most other nations have defence ministries, and for protocol and liaison purposes, the PRC needs to have an institution corresponding with those of other governments. However, the Minister of National Defence (who is usually a senior, although not always the highest ranking, military officer) is always a CMC member and usually a Vice Chairman and State Councillor, is an authoritative position. In ancient China, this office was variously referred to as the Grand Marshal (Eastern Han dynasty), Grand Commandant (Qin and Han dynasty), Grand Protector (Zhou dynasty) or the Troop Minister.


== List of defence ministries or departments ==

 Albania: Ministry of Defence
 Armenia: Defence Ministry
 Australia: Minister for Defence
 Austria: Ministry of National Defence and Sport
 Azerbaijan: Ministry of Defense
 Belgium: Ministry of Defence
 Bosnia and Herzegovina: Ministry of Defence
 Brazil: Ministry of Defence
 Bulgaria: Ministry of Defence
 Cambodia: Ministry of National Defence
 Canada: Minister of National Defence
 Chile: Ministry of National Defense
China: Two governments use "China" in their name:
 People's Republic of China: Ministry of National Defense of the People's Republic of China
 Republic of China: Ministry of National Defense

 Colombia: Ministry of National Defense
 Croatia: Ministry of Defence
 Cyprus: Minister of Defence
 Czech Republic: Ministry of Defence
 Democratic Republic of Congo: Minister of Defence (Democratic Republic of Congo)
 Denmark: Minister of Defence (list)
 Egypt: Minister of Defence and Military Production (list)
 Estonia: Minister of Defence
 Finland: Minister of Defence
 France: Minister of Defence
 Germany: Federal Ministry of Defence (list)
 Prussia: Minister of War (1808–1918)

 Greece: Minister for National Defence
 Hong Kong: Secretary for Defence, renamed Secretary for Security in 1973
 Hungary: Minister of Defence
 Indonesia: Minister of Defence
 India: Minister of Defence
 Ireland: Minister for Defence
 Israel: Ministry of Defense (in Hebrew: Sar Ha-Bitakhon)
 Italy: Minister of Defence
 Japan: Minister of Defense
 Kuwait:Deputy Prime Miniser and Minister of Defense
 Lithuania: Ministry of National Defence
 Macedonia: Minister of Defense
 Malaysia: Ministry of Defence
 Mexico: Secretariat of National Defense (Mexico)
   Nepal: Ministry of Defence
 Netherlands: Ministry of Defence
 New Zealand: Minister of Defence
 Norway: Minister of Defence
 Pakistan: Defence Minister
 People's Republic of China: Ministry of National Defense
 Peru: Ministry of Defense
 Philippines: Department of National Defense
 Poland: Ministry of National Defence
 Portugal: Ministry of National Defence
 Republic of China: Ministry of National Defense
 Romania: Ministry of National Defense
 Russia: Ministry of Defence
 Soviet Union: Minister of Defence
Russian Empire: List of heads of the military of Imperial Russia

 Serbia: Minister of Defence
 Singapore: Ministry for Defence
 Somalia: Ministry of Defence
 South Africa: Minister of Defence and Military Veterans
 South Korea: Ministry of National Defense
 Spain: Ministry of Defence
 Sri Lanka: Ministry of Defence
 Sweden: Minister for Defence
  Switzerland: Member of the Federal Council heading the:
Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports (list)
formerly "Federal Military Department" (list)

 Tajikistan: Ministry of Defence
 Thailand: Ministry of Defence
 Tonga: Minister of Defence
 Turkey: Ministry of National Defence (Turkey)
 United Kingdom: Secretary of State for Defence (with list)
 United States: Secretary of Defense (with list)
 Vietnam: Ministry of Defence
 Libya: Supreme Defense Council 


== See also ==
Chief of Defence
Department of Defence


== References ==
^ "National Security Act of 1947". Office of the Historian in the United States Department of State. Retrieved 2015-03-06. The 1947 law also caused far-reaching changes in the military establishment. The War Department and Navy Department merged into a single Department of Defense under the Secretary of Defense, who also directed the newly created Department of the Air Force. However, each of the three branches maintained their own service secretaries. In 1949 the act was amended to give the Secretary of Defense more power over the individual services and their secretaries. 
^ "National Security Act of 1947". Office of the Historian in the United States Department of State. Retrieved 2015-03-06. The Council itself included the President, Vice President, Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and other members (such as the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency), who met at the White House to discuss both long-term problems and more immediate national security crises. A small NSC staff was hired to coordinate foreign policy materials from other agencies for the President. Beginning in 1953 the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs directed this staff. Each President has accorded the NSC with different degrees of importance and has given the NSC staff varying levels of autonomy and influence over other agencies such as the Departments of State and Defense. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, for example, used the NSC meetings to make key foreign policy decisions, while John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson preferred to work more informally through trusted associates. Under President Richard M. Nixon, the NSC staff, then headed by Henry A. Kissinger, was transformed from a coordinating body into an organization that actively engaged in negotiations with foreign leaders and implementing the President’s decisions. The NSC meetings themselves, however, were infrequent and merely confirmed decisions already agreed upon by Nixon and Kissinger. 
^ "National Security Council". GOV.UK. Retrieved 2015-03-06. The National Security Council (NSC) is the main forum for collective discussion of the government’s objectives for national security and about how best to deliver them in the current financial climate.
A key purpose of the Council is to ensure that ministers consider national security in the round and in a strategic way. 
^ "Defense Minister of Tajikistan to Meet with CIS Colleagues in Moscow". Avesta. Retrieved 26 July 2014. 
^ http://lana-news.ly/eng/news/view/66241/Supreme_Defense_Council_sends_condolences_to_families_of_betrayed_Third_force_members_and_promises_to_arrest_assailants_Tripoli_25