The University of Vermont and State Agricultural College, more commonly known as the University of Vermont or UVM, is a public research university and, after 1862, the U.S. state of Vermont's sole land-grant university. The University of Vermont is labeled one of the original "Public Ivies," a publicly funded university considered as providing a quality of education comparable to those of the Ivy League.
Founded in 1791, UVM is among the oldest universities in the United States and the fifth college established in New England after Harvard, Yale, Dartmouth and Brown.
The university's 451-acre (183 ha) campus is located in Burlington, Vermont's largest city. Features of the UVM campus include the historic University Green, the Dudley H. Davis Center—the first student center in the nation to receive U.S. Green Building Council LEED Gold certification—the Fleming Museum of Art, and the Gutterson/Patrick athletic complex, home to UVM's Division I athletic teams. The largest hospital complex in the state, the UVM Medical Center, has its primary facility adjacent to the UVM campus and is affiliated with the UVM College of Medicine, one of the ten most-selective medical schools in the United States, with an acceptance rate of 4.0% annually.


== History ==

The University of Vermont was founded as a private university in 1791, the same year Vermont became the 14th state in the union. In 1865, the university merged with Vermont Agricultural College (chartered November 22, 1864, after the passage of the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act), emerging as the University of Vermont and State Agricultural College. The University of Vermont draws 6.8% of its annual budget of about $600 million from the state, and Vermont residents make up 35 percent of enrollment; 65 percent of students come from other states and countries.
Much of the initial funding and planning for the university was undertaken by Ira Allen, who is honored as UVM's founder. Allen donated a 50-acre (20 ha) parcel of land for the University's establishment. Most of this land has been maintained as the university's main green, upon which stands a statue of Allen.

The citizens of Burlington helped fund the university's first edifice, and, when it was destroyed by fire in 1824, also paid for its replacement. This building came to be known as "Old Mill" for its resemblance to New England mills of the time. The Marquis de Lafayette, a French general who became a commander in the American Revolution, toured all 24 U.S. states in 1824–1825 and while in Vermont laid the cornerstone of Old Mill, which stands on University Row, along with Ira Allen Chapel, Billings Center, Williams Hall, Royall Tyler Theatre and Morrill Hall. A statue of Lafayette stands at the north end of the main green.
The University of Vermont was the first American college or university with a charter declaring that the "rules, regulations, and by-laws shall not tend to give preference to any religious sect or denomination whatsoever."
In 1871, UVM defied custom and admitted two women as students. Four years later, it was the first American university to admit women to full membership into the Phi Beta Kappa Society, the country's oldest collegiate academic honor society. Likewise, in 1877, it initiated the first African-American into the society.

Justin Smith Morrill, a Representative (1855–1867) and Senator (1867–1898) from Vermont, author of the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act that created federal funding for establishing the U.S. Land-Grant colleges and universities, served as a trustee of the university from 1865 to 1898.
In 1924, the first radio broadcast in Vermont occurred from the college station, WCAX, run by students then, now the call sign of a commercial television station.
Prior to 1970, UVM's winter carnival celebrations for many decades included a widely attended competition known as Kakewalk ("Walkin' fo' de cake"). The event involved males wearing bright suits and blackface performing athletic dance routines in imitation of Black minstrel shows. Greater awareness of and sensitivity toward Black Americans promoted by the Civil Rights Movement led the University of Vermont to abolish Kakewalk in 1969.
At the end of each semester hundreds of students participate in the Naked Bike Ride or NBR, an event recognized by the student government association although never formally established. The students run, walk, or ride a bike while entirely naked at 12am around the central campus green next to Buckham Hall and Wills Hall. Dorm hall security is tightened during the event and no student is allowed to leave or enter dorm halls naked.


== Academics ==

The University of Vermont comprises seven undergraduate schools, an honors college, a graduate college, and a college of medicine. The Honors College does not offer its own degrees; students in the Honors College concurrently enroll in one of the university's seven undergraduate colleges or schools.
Bachelors, masters, and doctoral programs are offered through the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Education and Social Services, the College of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, the College of Medicine, the College of Nursing and Health Sciences, the Graduate College, the School of Business Administration, and The Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural Resources.


=== Rankings ===
UVM is ranked 85th on U.S. News & World Report's national university rankings.
In 2014, Forbes "America's Top Colleges" list ranks UVM 140th overall, out of the 650 top-ranked schools in the country.
A Wall Street Journal survey placed the University of Vermont #18 in a list of the top 30 public universities ranked for their success in placing students in the nation's most prestigious medical, law, and business graduate programs. There are over 500 public universities and colleges nationally. Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Johns Hopkins, University of Chicago, and MIT were among the 15 graduate programs whose admissions records were surveyed to develop WSJ's top "feeder schools" list.
The University of Vermont is ranked 40th on a list published by BusinessWeek.com of the top 50 U.S. colleges and universities whose bachelor's degree graduates earn the highest salaries. UVM is ranked seventh among public universities. UVM's high ranking was based on the salaries of those at the 90th percentile of mid-career alumni with 10 or more years of experience. 10% of mid-career alumni earn more than $194,000. UVM alums earn $82,700 at the median level in their mid-careers and $44,800 at the median as starting employees. The list is based on data compiled by PayScale.com.
UVM is ranked #14 on U.S. News & World Report's "Up-and-Coming" schools list for making "the most promising and innovative changes in the areas of academics, faculty and student life."
In its annual ratings, Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine has again ranked UVM among the top 100 best value public colleges in the country. Kiplinger Personal Finance has ranked UVM 63rd and 67th for in-state and out-of-state students, respectively. The magazine assessed a total of 600 public colleges and universities to determine this year's top 100 for value.


=== College of Arts and Sciences ===
The College of Arts and Sciences is the largest of UVM's schools and colleges and has the largest number of students, faculty and staff. The college also offers the bulk of the foundational courses that ensure that students all over campus have the tools to succeed in their more advanced and specialized academic endeavors. It offers 45 areas of study in the humanities, fine arts, social sciences, mathematics, natural and physical sciences. Undergraduate majors include Anthropology, Art History, Asian Studies, Biochemistry, Biology, Canadian Studies, Chemistry, Chinese, Classical Civilization, Computer Science, Economics, Engineering, English, Environmental Sciences, Environmental Studies, European Studies, Film and Television Studies, French, Geography, Geology, German, Global Studies, Greek, History, Italian Studies, Japanese, Latin, Latin American Studies, Linguistics, Materials Science, Mathematics and Statistics, Music, Neuroscience, Philosophy, Physics, Plant Biology, Political Science, Psychology, Religion, Russian, Russian/East European Studies, Sociology, Spanish, Studio Art, Theater, Women's and Gender Studies, and Zoology.


=== Grossman School of Business Administration ===
UVM's Grossman School of Business Administration is accredited by the AACSB International and offers concentrations in accounting, entrepreneurship, finance, human resource management, international management, management and the environment, management information systems, marketing, and production and operations management.
The School of Business Administration also offers graduate programs, including a Master of Business Administration and a Master of Accountancy.
The School was renamed the Grossman School of Business on Friday, October 2, 2015 in honor of a $20 million gift from alumnus Steven Grossman, the largest single gift in the University's history.


=== College of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences ===
CEMS is home to one school, the School of Engineering, two academic departments, the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, and two research centers — the Complex Systems Center and the Vermont Advanced Computing Center.
The College has about 750 undergraduate students, 150 graduate students and 85 faculty members.


=== College of Agriculture and Life Sciences ===
The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) offers programs in animal science (early admission to the Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University is available); biochemistry; biological science; community entrepreneurship; community and international development; dietetics, nutrition and food sciences; ecological agriculture; environmental science; environmental studies; microbiology; molecular genetics; plant biology; public communication; and sustainable landscape horticulture. The college is also home to the Center for Rural Studies.
The college also offers programs in conjunction with the college of arts and sciences. Students who choose these majors, such as Biological Sciences, can choose between either college.
As a land grant college, UVM receives an annual grant under the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service to provide agricultural research services to the state of Vermont.


=== College of Education and Social Services ===
UVM's College of Education and Social Services offers teacher education, early childhood development and social work studies.
The College comprises the Department of Integrated Professional Services, Department of Education, Department of Social Work, and the Center on Disability and Community Inclusion. Studies leading to a master's degree or doctorate are offered.


=== College of Medicine ===

In 1804, John Pomeroy began teaching students in his house in Burlington, as the first medical department at a State College or University. In 1822, the College of Medicine was established as the seventh medical college in the United States, founded by Pomeroy and the medical educator Nathan Smith.
UVM enrolls approximately 100 medical students in each class; there are approximately 400 medical students total. University of Vermont Medical Center is the primary clinical site of clinical education.
The UVM College of Medicine currently ranks 44th for overall quality in primary care training among the country's top 125 medical schools according to U.S. News & World Report's 2013 graduate school rankings.


=== Charles A. Dana Medical Library ===
The largest medical library in Vermont, the Charles A. Dana Library is the Vermont Resource Library of the National Network of Libraries of Medicine and serves the information needs of the Academic Health Center at the University of Vermont. The Academic Health Center is composed of the faculty, staff and students at UVM's College of Medicine and the College of Nursing and Health Sciences, as well as the physicians and other health care providers at the University of Vermont Medical Center. The Library also meets the health sciences information needs of the University of Vermont's undergraduate and graduate programs and is open to the citizens of the state of Vermont with health sciences information questions.


=== College of Nursing and Health Sciences ===
The College of Nursing and Health Sciences at UVM comprises four departments: Nursing, the Medical Laboratory and Radiation Sciences, Communication Sciences and Disorders, and Rehabilitation and Movement. Students in the college major in Athletic Training, Exercise and Movement Science, medical laboratory science, nuclear medicine technology, nursing, or radiation therapy, or they prepare to enter a doctorate of physical therapy program. The College also utilizes clinical facilities at the UVM Medical Center (formerly known as Fletcher Allen Health Center).


=== Honors College ===
The Honors College sponsors opportunities for students to participate in co-curricular programs and extracurricular activities — special symposia, dinners with visiting scholars, trips to museums and theaters in Montreal and Boston.
Faculty are selected from throughout the university to participate in the Honors College as lecturers in a first-year ethics course and advanced seminars, participants in reading groups, speakers at the Plenary Lecture Series, and mentors to honors students conducting research.
Through a required ethics course, small seminars, informal gatherings, and special research projects, students work alongside scholars from a section of the university's academic disciplines in the humanities, the sciences, engineering, nursing, medicine, education, business and more.


=== Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural Resources ===

From its origins in the School of Natural Resources (originally established in 1973), the Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural Resources (RSENR) was created in 2003. The Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural Resources seeks to cultivate an appreciation and understanding of ecological and social processes and values aimed at maintaining the integrity of natural systems and achieving a sustainable human community in harmony with the natural environment. The Rubenstein School targets three general areas of emphasis for scholarly pursuit: 1. Applied Ecology; 2. Environment & Society; and 3. Development & Use of Innovative Tools (e.g. GIS, spatial analysis, and modeling).
The main building hosting RSENR is located at the George D. Aiken Center, which was renovated in 2012 and received a U.S. Green Building Council LEED Platinum certification.
In 2007, the university won a $6.7 million grant to research the pollution problems of Lake Champlain.


== Financial ==
Undergraduate tuition for the 2011–12 academic year was set by the university's board of trustees at $14,784 for Vermont residents; $34,424 for out-of-state residents, plus room and board (average: $9,708).
The total operating budget for the University of Vermont is $601 million for 2012.
In 2012, salaries for the highest paid department heads ranged from $151,246 to $195,000 annually.


== Athletics ==

The athletic teams at UVM are known as the Catamounts. The university offers 18 varsity sports. Women's teams include basketball, cross-country, field hockey, ice hockey, lacrosse, skiing, soccer, swimming and diving, and track and field (indoor and outdoor). Men's teams include basketball, cross-country, ice hockey, lacrosse, skiing, soccer, and track and field (indoor and outdoor). All teams compete at the NCAA Division I level. Most teams compete in the America East Conference. Men's and women's hockey teams compete in the Hockey East Association. The alpine and Nordic ski teams compete in the E.I.S.A. (Eastern Intercollegiate Ski Association).
UVM's athletic teams won seven straight America East Academic Cups (2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011) for the best overall combined GPA among its student-athletes. UVM is the first school in the America East Conference to win three straight years and four times overall.

Highlights of recent varsity athletic seasons include the men's hockey teams trip to the Frozen Four in 2009; the women's and men's basketball teams advancing to the 2010 NCAA Tournament following America East Tournament titles; the ski team winning its sixth NCAA National Championship in 2012 in Bozeman, MT; in 2014, the men's hockey team earned its third trip to the NCAA Tournament since 2009 and the men's basketball team won the America East Regular Season title for the sixth time. The university has discontinued several major sports programs in its history, including football, softball and baseball. The softball and baseball programs were eliminated in 2009.
Thirty-six former UVM athletes have competed in 16 Olympic Games (13 winter, 3 summer) and combined have won six Olympic medals.
The UVM fight song was written in 1938 and is entitled "Vermont Victorious".


=== Club sports ===
UVM sponsors many club sports teams. The UVM Sailing Team was competitively ranked 8th in the nation as of November 15, 2009. UVM crew competes in the Head of the Charles Regatta and Dad Vail Regatta. The Cycling Team competes against other collegiate varsity teams and has won multiple national titles.


== Arts ==
UVM's Lane Performing Arts Series and Music Department sponsor instrumental and choral performances featuring national and international performers throughout the year. The Royall Tyler Theatre presents theater productions on its mainstage, often featuring Equity actors along with student talent. In addition to the Department of Theatre's three mainstage shows each year, a group of student-directed one acts, and The Toys Take Over Christmas, a holiday tradition in Burlington, are also performed. Past mainstage shows have included have been Godspell (2009); Compleat Female Stage Beauty (2008); The Miss Firecracker Contest, Found a Peanut, and La Ronde (2007); Ring Round the Moon, The Underpants, and Macbeth (2006); A Midsummer Night's Dream, Beyond Therapy, and Hair (2005); The Art of Dining, Anouilh's Antigone, and Rumors (2004); and Remember the Children: Terezin and Metamorphoses (2003).
The Robert Hull Fleming Museum is the university's museum. Its permanent collection includes a variety of works of art as well as anthropological and ethnographic artifacts. The Museum also features various visiting exhibits and special events.

The Vermont Mozart Festival developed at UVM and its first festivals were held at UVM. The festival was incorporated as an independent nonprofit organization in 1976 but retains ties to UVM.


== Student life ==
Student clubs and organizations, totaling more than 100, span student interests and receive sponsorship from the Student Government Association. Clubs with longstanding history and the largest memberships include: Volunteers in Action, the UVM Outing Club, Ski & Snowboard Club. Hillel also has a strong presence on the UVM campus. It's estimated that around 2,000 UVM students are Jewish, making up about 20% of the undergraduate student body.
UVM has a long history of student activism. There are many student organizations with focuses in social and environmental justice, attempting to make change both at UVM, as well as around the world.
In 2015, the university launched a wellness program called the Wellness Environment, or WE, a substance-free residential program that gives interested students a personal fitness and nutrition coach, has daily yoga and tai chi instruction, round-the-clock meditation sessions, and a mentorship program that pairs them with a Burlington youth.


== Sustainability ==
The University of Vermont has a long history toward operational environmental sustainability on its campus. In 1995, the Environmental Council at UVM was established to fill a gap regarding a bridge between operations and academics on campus greening issues. The first Council project was to hear presentations from the various environmental programs on campus to provide a baseline scan of campus operation environmental impact. Greening UVM was published in 1998 by the Council to establish a baseline on the environmental impact of the campus' operations. During the same year, a Recycled Paper Policy was created and was implemented in 1999. As a community stakeholder in the Lab-XL project, the Environmental Council received an EPA grant to support the Tracking UVM project and publication to assess relative environmental impact and community interest in laboratory chemical waste. Tracking UVM, a follow-up to the Greening UVM report, was published in 2002 and reported on the environmental progress of the University from 1990 to 2000. The University of Vermont's commitment to tracking its environmental performance was recognized in 2004 with Vermont's Governor's Award for Environmental Excellence for this 2002 environmental report card. Tracking UVM is one of the first report cards that track the environmental impact of campus operations in an institution of higher education.
In 2005, UVM's President Daniel M. Fogel signed the institution's Green Building Policy. The Recycled Paper Policy was updated in 2006 after two students pushed for the university to commit to purchasing 100% post-consumer, chlorine-free paper for routine copying and printing.
In 2007, President Fogel signs on to the American College and University Presidents' Climate Commitment. The American College & University Presidents' Climate Commitment (ACUPCC) is a high-visibility effort to address global climate disruption undertaken by a network of colleges and universities that have made institutional commitments to eliminate net greenhouse gas emissions from specified campus operations, and to promote the research and educational efforts of higher education to equip society to re-stabilize the earth's climate. Its mission is to accelerate progress towards climate neutrality and sustainability by empowering the higher education sector to educate students, create solutions, and provide leadership-by-example for the rest of society. In 2008, UVM dissolved the Environmental Council and established the Office of Sustainability. The Office of Sustainability aims to foster sustainable development and promote environmental responsibility at the University of Vermont by strategically bridging the academic activities of teaching, research, and outreach with the operations of the University. The sustainability office reports jointly to the Provost and to the Vice President for Finance & Administration, who supervises the director. There are two full-time staff and four Graduate Fellows, plus an Academic Advisor and a team of supporters.
In 2011, UVM released its Climate Action Plan to the American College & University President's Climate Commitment. The climate action plan focuses on the direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions from the institution's operations. The target dates for UVM's climate action plan are 2015 for 100% carbon neutral electricity (Scope 1) and 2020 for carbon neutral heating, cooling, and fleet (Scope 2). UVM aims to target the net zero emissions from Scope 3 sources by 2025.
In 2012, UVM became one of the first institutions nationwide to end the sale of bottled water on campus and mandate that one-third of drinks offered in vending machines be healthy options. During the same year, UVM's Board of Trustees passed a resolution to earmark $13 million for the fund, making it the largest challenge to date. Harvard's $12 million green loan fund had been the largest. In March 2012, UVM became 5th school in the nation to sign the Real Food Campus Commitment, pledging to purchase 20% real food by 2020.
The Certification for sustainable transport (CST) was founded in 2012 to help improve economic, environmental, and energy efficiency within the passenger transportation sector. The CST is a direct outgrowth of work that began at the University of Vermont (UVM) in 2005 and now houses the eRating certification, driver trainings, and an array of awareness and education programs. It is a nonprofit operating out of UVM's Extensions office.


== The Lawrence Debate Union ==
The university's debate team, which competes in both the American Policy Debate and British Parliamentary debate formats, is one of the oldest organizations on campus, and receives funding from a private grant established in 1899. The Lawrence Debate Union has sent students abroad to promote cultural understanding. In 2007, students traveled to Slovenia, Malaysia, and Thailand. The school has also sent students to the World University Debating Championship held in Ireland, Turkey, Botswana, Manila, Berlin, and Chennai, breaking into elimination rounds in the 2011 World University Debating Championship. Debaters from the LDU have also regularly competed in tournaments hosted by Oxford University and Cambridge University, and in 2013 won the title of the Budapest IV and Vienna IV in consecutive tournaments. Domestically, the LDU has also won the title for Northeast Universities Debating Sweepstakes champion for four consecutive years. The program is currently ranked seventh in the top schools for British Parliamentary debate in the world, and is the third ranked American university on the list, behind only Yale and Cornell. It encourages participation of all interested UVM students, and sponsors public debates at UVM and for the Burlington community. The coach of the LDU, Dr. Alfred C. Snider, is one of the most decorated debate coaches in the world and also coaches the National Speech and Debate Organization's national high school debate team to compete in the world championships.


== Concerts ==

The UVM Concerts Bureau (formally known as S.A. Concerts) is responsible for bringing live musical entertainment to the UVM community. SA Concerts features acts from across the country as well as local bands. The SGA funded club comprises an elected bureau of students who learn about the various aspects of the music industry by putting on shows and working with local sound and production professionals. Students are in charge of choosing and booking bands and are responsible for all production aspects on the day of show.
UVM Concert Bureau was established in 1971 and has brought in artists such as R.E.M., Phish (whose members attended UVM in the 1980s), Red Hot Chili Peppers, Sting, Lou Reed, Primus, The String Cheese Incident, James Brown, Bob Dylan, the Allman Brothers Band, Death Cab for Cutie, Jurassic 5, the Disco Biscuits, The Grateful Dead, Guster, and The Flaming Lips.
Since 2001, UVM Concerts Bureau, has organized an annual festival known as SpringFest, held in April. SpringFest headliners have included Vida Blue, The Roots, Cake, Keller Williams, Gov't Mule, co-headliners Robert Randolph & the Family Band and Ziggy Marley, and in 2008, Talib Kweli. Other acts to perform at various SpringFests have included The Meditations, Toots & the Maytals, Soulive, Rjd2, Apollo Sunshine, Ratatat in 2009, MSTRKRFT in 2010, and The Roots and Thievery Corporation in 2011.


== Publications ==
The Vermont Cynic, a weekly student newspaper
The Water Tower, an alternative weekly student newspaper
UVM Today, news from UVM's University Communications Office
Vermont Quarterly, UVM's alumni magazine
Proverbium: Yearbook of International Proverb Scholarship


== Greek life ==
The University of Vermont Greek Community is one of the oldest in the nation with the first fraternal organization starting in 1836. The 5 pillar values of the University of Vermont Greek community are citizenship, leadership, lifelong learning, friendship, and social justice. The University of Vermont values its Greek Community for their strong commitment to collaboration and relationship building. Over 8% of students at UVM join Greek Life organizations. Fraternity and sorority members are very involved on campus in roles including Student Government (SGA), Orientation Leaders, Advocat and Residence Assistants.


=== Fraternities ===
Pi Kappa Alpha
Sigma Phi Society
Alpha Gamma Rho
Phi Gamma Delta
Kappa Sigma
Delta Tau Delta
Phi Mu Delta
Alpha Epsilon Pi
Acacia


=== Sororities ===
Alpha Delta Pi
Alpha Chi Omega
Pi Beta Phi
Delta Delta Delta
Kappa Alpha Theta
Kappa Delta


=== Honor societies ===


== Development ==
The university has many expansions underway. Among them, a $100 million Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics or "STEM" complex. This complex will include over 250,000 square feet of new labs, classrooms, lecture halls, and offices for STEM disciplines. All construction is scheduled to be completed by 2018.
Recent UVM projects:
50,000 square-foot Vermont State Health Laboratory in Colchester (Completed) 
Expansion of the Business School's Kalkin Hall (under construction) 
James M. Jefford's Hall (Completed)  – Shared between the department of plant biology and the department of plant and soil sciences.


== Notable alumni and graduates ==
Trey Anastasio, guitarist from the band Phish; did not graduate (transferred to Goddard College).
Consuelo Northrup Bailey, first woman admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court; first woman to serve as speaker of the Vermont House; and the first woman in the nation to be elected Lieutenant Governor (1955–1959). Vice-chair of the Republican National Committee from 1952 to 1956.
Donald H. Balch, United States Air Force general
William F. Ruprecht, President and CEO, Sotheby's
Jedediah Hyde Baxter, son of Portus Baxter and Surgeon General of the United States Army
Dierks Bentley, country music artist (attended UVM one year; graduated from Vanderbilt University)
Mark Boone Junior aka Mark Heidrich, actor; best known for role as Bobby Munson on Sons of Anarchy and roles in Batman Begins and Memento
Frank M. Bryan, Professor of Political Science
Daniel Burke, former President of the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), engineered the $3.5 billion acquisition of ABC by Capital Cities in 1986.; was the founder and original owner of the Portland Sea Dogs minor league baseball team.
Sarah E. Buxton, (2000), Member, Vermont House of Representatives, former member, UVM Board of Trustees
Pedro Albizu Campos (1912–1913), Puerto Rican political leader, orator, lawyer and humanist; was either President or Honorary President of the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party from 1930 until his death in 1965.
Matthew Choate 1992, Vermont state senator 2008-2010
Barbara Cochran, Class of 1978; alpine ski racer, who won the gold medal in the slalom in the 1972 Winter Olympics.
Ray Collins, Class of 1909, Boston Red Sox pitcher (1909–15) and later coached for UVM. Started the first World Series game at Fenway Park in 1912. Indoor track facility named for him and Larry Gardner.
Grace Coolidge, First Lady of the United States 1923-1929.
Jedd Philo Clark Cottrill, Class of 1852, Member, Wisconsin State Senate.
Major General Steven A. Cray, Adjutant General of Vermont, March, 2013 to present.
Major General Thomas E. Drew, Adjutant General of Vermont, August, 2012 to 2013.
John Dewey, Class of 1879, Pragmatist philosopher and educator.
Julius Yemans Dewey, Physician, Founder of the National Life Insurance Company. Father of the only Admiral of the Navy in U.S. history, George Dewey.
Lieutenant Governor Brian Dubie; Vermont's 85th Lieutenant Governor, 2002–2010.
Lieutenant General Michael Dubie, Deputy Commander of United States Northern Command and former Vermont Adjutant General.
Harold "Duke" Eaton, Jr., Justice of the Vermont Supreme Court
David Franzoni, an Academy Award-winning screenwriter.
Larry Gardner, Class of 1909; Major League third baseman for 17 years (1908–24) for the Boston Red Sox, Philadelphia Athletics and Cleveland Indians. Played on four World Champions, twice drove in the winning run in the deciding game of the World Series, and later coached and served as the athletic director at UVM. Indoor track facility named for him and Ray Collins.
Mike Gordon, bass player from the band Phish
Jack Arute, ABC and ESPN sideline reporter.
Aaron H. Grout, Vermont Secretary of State
Albert Gutterson, Gold medal winner in long jump in 1912 Summer Olympics. Hockey facility, Gutterson Fieldhouse is named after him.
Brian Halligan, CEO and co-founder of HubSpot and author
Louisa Hodge, Award winning Emmy Winner Meteorologist/Weather Anchor/General Assignment Reporter for KCBS-2/KCAL-9 CBS Broadcasting Studio Center, Los Angeles, California.
H. H. Holmes, American serial killer, dropped out after one year
Abdul W. Haqiqi, Afghan American economist.
Hollister Jackson, Lieutenant Governor of Vermont who died in the Great Flood of 1927.
Horatio Nelson Jackson, Vermont physician who carried out the first coast-to-coast automobile trip in the United States and was a founder of the American Legion.
Billy Kidd, alpine ski racer, 1964 Olympic silver medalist, raced for UVM before joining the U.S. Ski Team.
Amr Kashmiri, Pakistani actor and musician.
Madeleine Kunin, former Governor of Vermont; former U.S. Ambassador to Switzerland; former Deputy Secretary of Education, U.S. Dept. of Education
Jack Lamabe, Major League pitcher for several different teams over seven seasons including the 1967 World Champion St. Louis Cardinals.
John LeClair, member of the 1992–93 Stanley Cup winning Montreal Canadiens. Has three 50 goals seasons in the NHL. Former member of the Philadelphia Flyers and Pittsburgh Penguins.
Rollie Massimino, Class of 1956. Longtime college basketball coach who led the Villanova University Men's Basketball team to the 1985 NCAA Championship.
Kirk McCaskill, Major League pitcher for the California Angels and Chicago White Sox.
Torrey Mitchell, NHL center for the Buffalo Sabres.
James O'Halloran, Canadian politician
John Eugene Osborne, Third Governor of Wyoming and United States Representative from Wyoming
Wayne H. Page, Adjutant General of the Vermont National Guard
James Stevens Peck, American Civil War officer who later served as Adjutant General of the Vermont National Guard
Henry Farnham Perkins (1877–1956) was an American zoologist and eugenicist.
Éric Perrin, an NHL forward for the Tampa Bay Lightning when they won the Stanley Cup in 2004.
Susan Powers, American folk artist.
Theodore Prentiss, Member, Wisconsin State Assembly
E. Annie Proulx, Pulitzer Prize-winning author of The Shipping News and Brokeback Mountain.
Henry Jarvis Raymond, Co-Founder of the New York Times and Harper's New Monthly Magazine
Martin St. Louis, three-time NCAA All-American winger. Four-time NHL All-Star and NHL Hart Trophy and Lady Byng Trophy winner. Won the Stanley Cup with the Tampa Bay Lightning in the 2003–04 Season.
Ryen Russillo, Co-host of the critically acclaimed ESPN Radio Show 'SVP & Russillo', host of ESPN Radio's 'College Gameday.' Number one fan of Matthew McConaughey.
Jessica Seinfeld, author and cook
Patrick Sharp, three-time Stanley Cup champion hockey player for the Chicago Blackhawks. Attended UVM but did not graduate., 2014 gold medalist, 2011 NHL all-star, and current member of the Dallas Stars.
Gail Sheehy, author
Kerr Smith, actor best known for playing Jack McPhee on the television drama Dawson's Creek
Viktor Stålberg, winger for the Nashville Predators. 2009 NCAA All-American, 2013 Stanley Cup champion. Attended UVM but did not graduate.
Tim Thomas, goaltender and two-time Vezina Trophy winner for the Boston Bruins. Won the Stanley Cup and Conn Smythe Trophy with the Bruins in the 2010–11 Season.
Frank Trigilio, American football player
George R. Vincent, physician and Greenback Party politician in Wisconsin
William Almon Wheeler, Vice-President of the United States, attended for two years (1837-1839), presented honorary degree of LL.D. in 1867, bachelor of arts (as in course) in 1876.
Jody Williams, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate for leading international action to ban land mines
Samuel Worcester, missionary to the Cherokees in Georgia and later in Indian Territory during early 19th Century


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
University of Vermont Athletics website
 "Vermont, University of". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.