"When contact changes minds: An experiment on transmission of support for gay equality" is an article by then-UCLA political science graduate student Michael LaCour and Columbia University political science professor Donald Green that was published in the academic journal Science in December 2014 and retracted in May 2015. The article purported to demonstrate that people's minds can often be changed on socially divisive issues such as gay marriage, via a single instance of direct contact with affected parties. After the retraction, The Carnegie Corporation of New York rescinded Donald Green's 2015 Andrew Carnegie Fellowship, revoking a $200,000 award to support Donald Green's research, and Princeton University rescinded an assistant professorship that had been offered to LaCour.


== Study ==
According to the original paper, U.S. voters were door-to-door canvassed by people who were gay and who used social scripts to discuss either gay marriage or recycling. LaCour and Green (2014) wrote that the study participants also completed a series of online surveys (baseline and follow-ups) which included a "gay feeling thermometer". Results not only showed notable changes towards pro-gay marriage but also found a spill-over effect, such that other people in the household also became more pro-gay marriage.
The study's findings made international headlines and received wide media attention including in The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, The Economist, The Los Angeles Times, and This American Life. The study attracted widespread attention, in part, because it seemed to challenge the conventional wisdom and scholarship about social persuasion that suggests that people tend to maintain their points of view, sometimes regardless of what they read or hear to the contrary.
The Yes Campaign in Ireland stated that LaCour and Green (2014) “provided a template" for campaigners to use one-to-one contact and first person accounts to reach out to more conservative voters, leading to the historic Irish referendum legalizing gay marriage on May 22, 2015.


== Critique ==
The When contact changes minds study was subsequently discredited after a critique by David Broockman, Joshua Kalla, and Peter Aronow on May 19, 2015, titled "Irregularities in LaCour (2014)", questioned the study's academic integrity. Broockman et al. suggested that the baseline survey results were in fact taken from an earlier dataset called the Cooperative Campaign Analysis Project (CCAP), and that the later sets of data were fabricated from the first using statistical methods to shift the results and by adding normally distributed noise. In addition, they noted that canvasser identifiers were missing from the results, making it impossible to verify whether different canvassers produced different results as the original study claimed.
LaCour's coauthor, Donald Green, subsequently requested that the paper be retracted because of “irregularities” in the paper's data and LaCour's failure to give him the raw data on which the paper was based. Yet Green, as senior author on the Science paper, certified that he had examined the raw/original data on his Science/AAAS Authorship Form and Statement of Conflicts of Interest. The Science terms include, prominently, the following statement: “The senior author from each group is required to have examined the raw data their group has produced.”
In his letter to the journal, Green wrote: "I am deeply embarrassed by this turn of events and apologize to the editors, reviewers, and readers of Science." Andrew Gelman, a professor of statistics and political science at Columbia University, wrote in the Washington Post that Donald Green had accepted LaCour's data "on faith". On May 28, 2015, the study was retracted by Science, on the basis that incentives to participate in the survey on which the study was based had been misrepresented, that sponsors had been falsely identified, that the authors could not produce the original data, and (citing the findings of Broockman et al.) that there were "statistical irregularities."
On May 29, 2015, LaCour uploaded a response to the criticisms. LaCour admitted to some false statements and apologized for "misrepresenting survey incentives and funding," but denied intentionally falsifying the data itself (though he stated that he could not rule out the possibility that he had "mistakenly mixed up" hypothetical data with collected data). He disputed the timeline of events presented in Broockman et al. (2015) and the actual timeline of events and disclosure. He argued that the failure of Broockman et al. to replicate LaCour and Green (2014) was likely the result of a failure to follow the respondent-driven sampling procedure used in LaCour and Green (2014). He stated that Broockman et al. had selected the "incorrect variable" from CCAP (2012) and then manipulated that variable to make the distribution look more like that in LaCour and Green (2014). LaCour claimed that when the "correct" variable is used, the distributions between the CCAP thermometer and the LaCour and Green (2014) thermometer are statistically distinguishable. LaCour said, "selecting the incorrect variable may have been an oversight, but further manipulating that variable to make the distribution look more like LaCour and Green (2014) is a curious and possibly intentional 'error.'" LaCour also claimed that an independent replication supported the main finding reported in LaCour and Green (2014).
In the New York Times article, LaCour said the study erred in methods, not results. A subsequent article published by Science indicated that LaCour's response was lacking, failing to address a number of issues while raising new questions about his conduct. A blog post published by Discover stated that LaCour's rebuttal arguments were "very weak" and failed to refute a central criticism of the Broockman paper.
The journal Science retracted the article with the concurrence of Green while LaCour did not agree to the retraction.


== Popular press ==
Various opinions have been advanced in the media as to why Science published the flawed article by LaCour and Green. The conservative editorial page of The Wall Street Journal speculated that LaCour's argument originally gained acceptance in the scientific community because it "flattered the ideological sensibilities of liberals". New York Magazine columnist Jesse Singal dismissed the Wall Street Journal editorial as silly and uninformed, and suggested instead that the main reason for the article's publication was its contradiction of prior research. Gelman, in his Washington Post article, said that the journal Science is sometimes called a tabloid "because of its pattern of publishing dramatic but fishy claims (at least in social science)".
As to what motivated LaCour's behavior in the first place, his co-author, Donald Green, has expressed bafflement. New York Magazine points to the pressure that social scientists are under to publish scholarly articles, while stating that "profound pressure to publish certainly can’t explain LaCour’s deception on its own". Conservative pro-gay-marriage columnist S.E. Cupp wrote that, "The doctored study will only encourage the perception that advocates are going too far."


== References ==
Notes

Bibliography
LaCour, Michael J. & Green, Donald P. (2014). When contact changes minds: An experiment on transmission of support for gay equality[2]. Science 346(6215): 1366.
LaCour, Michael J. (2014, August). The echo chambers are empty: Direct evidence of balanced, not biased, exposure to mass media. In Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association.
LaCour, Michael J. and Vavreck, Lynn (2014). Improving media measurement: Evidence from the field.[3] Political Communication, 31, 408-420. DOI: 10.1080/10584609.2014.921258