The Weaker Sex is a 1948 British drama film directed by Roy Ward Baker.
It was one of the most popular movies at the British box office in 1948.
The film's title is ironic, its subject being what The New York Times described as the "heroics of that valiant legion of women who stood, but did not wait, through the long war years and the now dreary post war years." 


== Plot ==
Life on the British home front during World War II. Widowed Martha Dacre tries to keep house and home together during the run up to the D-Day landings. With lodgers to contend with, two daughters, and her son away in the Navy, she has chosen to stay at home as a housewife. But when her son's ship is damaged during the landings, she experiences regrets about not taking a more active role in the war.


== Cast ==
Martha Dacre – Ursula Jeans
Geoffrey Radcliffe – Cecil Parker
Helen Wyland – Joan Hopkins
Nigel Wyland – Derek Bond
Lolly – Lana Morris
Roddy McIntyre – John Stone
Benjie Dacre – Digby Wolfe
Mrs Gaye – Thora Hird
Soldier – Bill Owen
Harriet Lessing – Marian Spencer
Captain Dishart – Kynaston Reeves
Clippie – Eleanor Summerfield
Woman – Gladys Henson
Mrs Maling – Dorothy Bramhall
Shop Supervisor – Marjorie Gresley


== Critical reception ==
The New York Times wrote, "a thoroughly professional cast and an adult script make the drama genuine and trenchant. Ursula Jeans is excellent as the beleaguered mother who minimizes her work and sacrifices by remarking "one is given no choice — just a little extra strength from somewhere." Cecil Parker is equally adept in his restrained portrayal of the commander she eventually marries. A lady exotically named Thora Hird contributes a superbly droll bit as a Yorkshire servant and Joan Hopkins, Lana Morris, Digby Wolfe, Derek Bond and John Stone add solid characterizations as the children and sons-in-law" ; and Sky Movies wrote, "the best reviews of the period were saved for Thora Hird as Mrs Gage, the 'daily' with a dry sense of humour", and concluded, "good, solid drama told convincingly – if a trifle over-sentimental today." 


== References ==


== External links ==
The Weaker Sex at the Internet Movie Database