The house hippo is the subject of a Canadian television public service announcement (PSA) produced by Concerned Children's Advertisers (now known as Companies Committed to Kids) in May 1999. Their stated intent is to educate children about critical thinking with regard to what they see in television advertising, and remind them that "it's good to think about what you're watching on TV, and ask questions". 


== Message ==

The narration of the piece is in the style of a Hinterland Who's Who spot, and goes as follows:
"It's night time in a kitchen just like yours; all is quiet, or is it?"
"The North American house hippo is found throughout Canada and the Eastern United States. House hippos are very timid creatures and they are rarely seen, but they will defend their territory if provoked. They come out at night to search for food, water, and materials for their nests."
"The favourite foods of the house hippo are chips, raisins and the crumbs from peanut butter on toast."
"They build their nests in bedroom closets using lost mittens, dryer lint and bits of string. The nests have to be very soft and warm; house hippos sleep about 16 hours a day."
That looked really real, but you knew it couldn't be true, didn't you? That's why it's good to think about what you're watching on TV, and ask questions, kind of like you just did.
A message from Concerned Children's Advertisers.


== Media Smart Version ==
European company Media Smart adapted the footage in 2002 to create a new commercial for UK television. The UK version was considerably shorter and featured new narration and background music as well as a new ending promoting the company's website.
"Every night, when you're fast asleep in bed; the House Hippo ventures out."
"House Hippos are normally timid creatures but they will defend their territory fiercely if provoked."
"In the short time that they're awake, they will scour the house in search of water and leftover snacks."
"Before tip-toeing back to their nests, to rest."
Sometimes you see things on television that look real, but you know they're not. Asking questions and thinking about what you see on TV is called being "Media Smart".
For more information visit our website.


== References ==


== External links ==
CCA's Media Literacy PSAs (including House Hippo)
The PSA on YouTube
The Media Smart version of the PSA