A moving company, removalist or van line is a company that helps people and businesses move their goods from one place to another. It offers all inclusive services for relocations like packing, loading, moving, unloading, unpacking, arranging of items to be shifted. Additional services may include cleaning of the place and warehousing facilities.


== Overview ==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 40 million Americans have moved annually over the last decade. Of those people who have moved in the United States, 84.5% of them have moved within their own state, 12.5% have moved to another state and 2.3% have moved to another country.

In the US and Canada the cost, for long distance moves, is typically determined by the weight of the items needing to be moved, the distance, how quickly the items are to be moved, and the time of the year or month which the move occurs. In the UK and Australia the standard forming the price is the volume of the items, instead of the weight. Some movers may offer flat rate pricing.
The use of truck rental services, or simply borrowing similar hardware, is referred to as DIY moving in Australia, New Zealand and the UK. The parties moving borrow or rent a truck or trailer large enough to carry the load of household goods to be relocated and, if necessary, obtaining moving equipment such as dollies, furniture pads and cargo belts to protect the furniture and make things easier to move.
It also involves finding or buying materials such as boxes, paper, tape and bubble wrap with which to pack boxable and/or fragile household goods for their protection and for compact carrying and stacking on moving day. Self-service moving companies offer another viable option: The person moving buys space on one or more trailers or shipping containers. These containers are driven by professionals to the new location.
Nowadays moving companies provide transit insurance that covers the damages to moving objects.


== See also ==
Moving scam
Relocation service
Structure relocation


== References ==


== External links ==
Glossary of Moving Terms
NYTimes Articles about the moving industry