Hike Messenger (stylized as hike messenger) is a cross-platform instant messaging service for smartphones that uses the internet for communication. In addition to text messaging, users can send each other graphical stickers, emoticons, images, videos, audios, files, voice messages, contacts and user location.
Hike was launched on 12 December 2012  and raised its first round of funding of $7 million from Bharti SoftBank in April 2013. Hike is a joint venture between Bharti Enterprises and Softbank.


== HistoryEdit ==
Launched on 12 December 2012, Hike attained 15 million users in February 2014 and raised $14 million for its development. Over the next few months, the application introduced free text messaging anywhere in India, chat themes, updated stickers, hidden chats and revamped user interface. In August 2014, Hike hit 35 million users and raised another big round of funding - $65 million - led by Tiger Global.
Hike Messenger made its first acquisition, buying free voice-calling company Zip Phones, which allowed it to launch free app based calling services that are emerging as a key draw for users
In 2015, Hike launched the "Great Indian Sticker Challenge" to invite designers to design new stickers. As per the communication statistics on Hike, 30% of the traffic comes from stickers.
On Oct 2015, the CEO of hike announced that the userbase of hike reached up to 70 million and more than 20 billion messages are shared each month. 


== FeaturesEdit ==
Apart from basic social messaging means like photos, videos and audio files, Hike allows users to "nudge", a feature used to ping the receiver. In addition to that, the application supports chat themes, graphical stickers, PDF files and Office Files. It also allows users to hide individual and group chats providing extended privacy. The messenger now provides free voice-calling over 2G, 3G and Wi-Fi across the globe in over 200 countries.
In January 2015, hike introduced a voice calling feature for their users. 
During the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015, Hike partnered with CricBuzz to keep their Android users updated about the world cup scores.
In Sep 2015, hike launched free group calls with up to 100 people in a conference call.
Hike Direct, a feature that allow users to share messages and files without any kind of data charges within a radius of 100 metres through Wi-Fi Direct, was made available on Oct 2015. 


== PrivacyEdit ==
Hike uses a 128-bit SSL encrypted, firewalled server for the exchange of media and text messages only on wifi. Messages are stored locally in the user's device and the data is not backed-up to Hike's server. Hike is also accused of spamming contacts of the Hike users by sending unsolicited SMSes purporting to be from the Hike user to the non-users in their contacts, thereby validating the fact that they back-up the contact numbers without explicit permission from the non-users.


== ReferencesEdit ==