Fallout 1.5: Resurrection is a mod for Fallout 2. Developed by four fans of the game from the Czech Republic, a version was released there in 3 October 2013. Working on the mod during their free time, the development took approximately 10 years. The mod offers a completely new story and locations. It is estimated that finishing the game takes 25 hours.
The title Resurrection symbolizes not only a revival of an old Fallout but also the protagonist of the mod who is resurrected.
The English version of the mod is scheduled for late 2015.


== Gameplay ==

The mod features the same gameplay as original games. The player is free to move at will until they enter into combat. Combat gives them a number of action points to move, fire, check their equipment, reload and the like. When a player uses up all of their action points, they end their turn and enemies start theirs. If the player survives unharmed, he or she has their action points restored. Injuries and poisons can reduce the number of action points available both in a single term and semi-permanently until combat ends and the player can be treated. Combat and completion of jobs or quests rewards the player with experience points with which they can level up their characters and apply beneficial perks to become more suited to the dangerous post-apocalyptic world. General gameplay consists of traveling and interacting with local inhabitants and organizations to complete goals and aid or inhibit the NPCs. The player's actions dictate what future story or gameplay opportunities are available. Mature themes such as alcohol consumption, drug usage and sex are present.
Organized crime, prostitution and slavery are major elements of the setting. Character creation is based on the SPECIAL role-playing system.


== Plot ==
The story is set in 2170 in what was once New Mexico. The injured protagonist wakes up in a cave with amnesia. He starts to search for hints of his past but the only clue he has is a mysterious talisman.
On his way he comes across a group of ghouls who act as though they know him and then proceed to try and to kill him. The player then finds a dying ghoul named Thomas, who claims he was the player's best friend. Thomas reveals to him that they are members of the Cult of Renewal, led by a person known as the Saviour. The cult has a machine that turns ghouls into normal humans. The problem is that turning a Ghoul human again requires at least one normal person and the turned person later dies of tissue decomposition. The protagonist is, along with the Saviour, one of turned Ghouls so it means that he will die as well. In the Renewal base the player can choose whether he joins the cult once again or destroys the cult.
If the player joins the cult once again, he can help the cult destroy the city of Albuquerque. But they will die in the battle. Renewal then dominates the whole area which overshadows a conflict with New California Republic.
The player can also destroy the base of Renewal which then terminates hope of the Ghouls to become normal again. The cult is destroyed and the protagonist goes to wasteland where he kills himself to avoid a slow death of a tissue decomposition.


== Development ==
The development started in 2003 when the official editor and a script documentation for Fallout was released. It took 10 years because developers underestimated the project and mny works. Because of it many things were changing during the development and the original idea of what would story be about was completely changed. The mod was completed and released in 2013. Developers currently focus on a translation of the mod into English.


== Reception ==
The mod has received universal acclaim upon its release and was treated by critics as a full-length game. The average score of the mod was over 90%. The mod was elected 6th best game of the year by readers of Bonusweb. Readers of Eurogamer elected it to be third best role-playing game of the year.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site