Heysham Power Station is a nuclear power station located in Heysham, Lancashire, England, operated by EDF Energy. The site is divided into two separately-managed stations, Heysham 1 and Heysham 2, both of the advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR) type, with two reactors each.
On 18 October 2010 the British government announced that Heysham was one of the eight sites it considered suitable for future nuclear power stations.


== Heysham 1 ==
Construction of Heysham 1, which was undertaken by British Nuclear Design & Construction (BNDC), a consortium backed by English Electric, Babcock & Wilcox and Taylor Woodrow Construction, began in 1970, with the first reactor commencing operations in 1983 and the second reactor following in 1984. However, initial production levels were low, and full commercial operation was only declared in 1989. It is likely to remain in operation until 2019. Its generating capacity is 1150 MWe. The reactors were supplied by National Nuclear Corporation and the turbines by GEC.
Heysham 1 shares its reactor design with Hartlepool nuclear power station, which introduced the replaceable pod boiler design. The CEGB specified a compact design for the Heysham 1 and Hartlepool power station reactor islands in comparison to the design of the two preceding stations at Hinkley Point B and Hunterston B in order to reduce the capital cost, but this caused expensive construction delays because of restricted access. The Heysham 2 reactor island occupies a much larger footprint than Heysham 1 for a similar design output of power.
In 2013 a defect was found by a regular inspection in one of the eight pod boilers of unit 1. The reactor resumed operation at a lower output level with the defective pod boiler disabled, until June 2014 when more detailed inspections confirmed a crack in the boiler spine. As a precaution, unit 2 and the sister Hartlepool nuclear power station were also shut down for inspection.
All units have since returned to full power after successful inspections on the three other reactors revealed no other defects. Heysham 1 unit 1 will operate on six out of the eight boilers until a detailed repair strategy has been developed.


== Heysham 2 ==
The construction, which was undertaken by a consortium known as National Nuclear Corporation (NNC), began in 1979 and the station opened in 1988. Its generating capacity is 1250 MWe, and it is estimated to keep running until at least 2023. Heysham 2 shares its reactor design with Torness nuclear power station and is a development of the reactor design used at Hinkley Point B. The reactors were supplied by NNC and the turbines by NEI.


== See also ==
Nuclear power in the United Kingdom
Energy policy of the United Kingdom
Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom


== References ==


== External links ==
Heysham 1 official website
Heysham 2 official website
Heysham 1, Nuclear Engineering International wall chart, 1971
Heysham 2/Torness, Nuclear Engineering International wall chart, 1981