"Thank You" is the third episode of the sixth season of the post-apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead. It aired on AMC on October 25, 2015. The episode takes place directly after the ending of the season premiere "First Time Again" from the perspective of Rick and the other survivors outside the walls dealing with an incoming herd coming in their direction. It primarily focuses on Glenn Rhee and Michonne as they lead a group of survivors back in the direction of Alexandria, hoping they will make it on time.
This episode marks the final appearance of recurring character, Nicholas (Michael Traynor), as he is killed off in the episode. The indefinite fate of Glenn in the episode was highlighted by several critics.


== PlotEdit ==
Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln), Glenn Rhee (Steven Yeun), Michonne (Danai Gurira) and others race towards Alexandria as the horn draws several walkers towards the town. Rick orders Daryl Dixon (Norman Reedus) to continue leading the rest of the herd away from Alexandria, as part of their plan. He then instructs Glenn and Michonne to lead the group back home, to not stop and to kill anything in their way, but warns that they may have to leave others behind if they could not keep up; this is overheard by Heath (Corey Hawkins). Rick improvises a plan by using an RV to draw the stowaway herd back into Daryl's path, and splits up with the group. The horn then stops blaring. Daryl ignores Rick's plan and leaves Abraham Ford (Michael Cudlitz) and Sasha Williams (Sonequa Martin-Green) to lead the herd by themselves.
The group encounter several hurdles: two Alexandrians are killed, David (Jay Huguley) is bitten by a walker, and Annie (Beth Keener) and Scott (Kenric Green) are injured. They come across a deserted town; despite having panic attacks, Nicholas (Michael Traynor) is tasked with leading the group around the town, as he has been there before. Ignoring Rick's order to not stop until they get to Alexandria, the group retreats to a pet store after encountering several walkers. Glenn devises a plan to light one of the buildings on fire to distract the undead, and Nicholas offers to lead him to a feed store. Annie and Scott suggest the group should leave them behind due to their injuries, but Heath insists that they would not leave them behind and glares at Michonne. When Michonne confronts Heath about his attitude, the latter tells her that he overheard what Rick said, while the former counters by telling him that he hasn't experienced what Rick has done, despite being on several supply runs. David, knowing he is going to die, writes a farewell note to his wife, but Michonne assures him that he can make it home for a final goodbye.
Michonne dispatches two walkers that were hidden inside the pet store, but this draws the herd to their location, forcing the group to flee. Annie and David are killed by walkers, but Michonne, Heath and Scott manage to escape the town and arrive in Alexandria, where they discover that it had been attacked. Glenn and Nicholas discover the feed store had already been burned down, and are faced with finding another building as a massive herd arrives. A panicking Nicholas unknowingly leads the two to a dead end, where they climb a dumpster. Surrounded by walkers, Nicholas calms himself and thanks Glenn before committing suicide. His body knocks over Glenn into the herd. Glenn screams as he is seemingly devoured by walkers.
Rick arrives at the RV and races towards the location where he instructed Glenn to intercept the herd. He radios Daryl that the breakaway walkers will reunite with the herd, but he is ambushed by the Wolves that Morgan Jones (Lennie James) had previously let go. Rick dispatches all the Wolves, and realizes that they had attacked Alexandria. As walkers approach, he attempts to start the RV, but has trouble doing so.


== ProductionEdit ==

The episode was directed by Michael Slovis and written by Angela Kang. It features guest appearances from Corey Hawkins as Heath, Michael Traynor as Nicholas, Kenric Green as Scott, Beth Keener as Annie and Justin Miles as Barnes. Despite being credited, Lauren Cohan, Chandler Riggs, Melissa McBride, Lennie James, Josh McDermitt, Christian Serratos, Alanna Masterson, Seth Gilliam, Ross Marquand, Alexandra Breckenridge, Austin Nichols and Tovah Feldshuh do not appear in the episode. The episode features only six series regulars.
After the airing of the episode, Glenn's supposed death drew much critical attention, with several critics speculating whether he was indeed dead or not. Showrunner Scott M. Gimple made the statement, "We will see Glenn, some version of Glenn or parts of Glenn, again, either in flashback or in the current timeline. We will complete the story. That's the important thing."


== ReceptionEdit ==


=== Critical receptionEdit ===
The episode received critical acclaim and reviewers highlighted the fate of Glenn Rhee in particular, leading to speculation that he had survived the episode. It earned a 97% rating with an average score of 8.5 out of 10 on Rotten Tomatoes, whose consensus reads: "'Thank You' is an example of what The Walking Dead does best, combining gripping action with troubling existential questions in a heart-wrenching plot twist."
Steve Wright for SciFi Now assessed that the sixth season is a "step in quality" from the previous one and "one thing it has been missing is an 'Oh my god, I can't believe that just happened!' moment... Well, the wait is officially over." Jeremy Egner for The New York Times praised Michael Slovis and said: "The scene on the Dumpster was a stunner, the various components - performance, makeup, sound, direction - coalescing into a woozy, terrifying sequence that ranks with the series's best".


=== RatingsEdit ===
The episode averaged a 6.8 rating in adults 18-49 and 13.1 million viewers overall, a rise from the previous episode.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==

"Thank You" at AMC
"Thank You" at the Internet Movie Database
"Thank You" at TV.com