The Dumaguete Science High School is a public science high school located in Dumaguete City, Negros Oriental, Philippines. It is a DepEd-recognized science high school and one of three science high schools in Negros Oriental, the others being the Bais City National Science High School, Tanjay Science High School in Tanjay City, and Zamboanguita Science High School in Zamboanguita. It serves as the Regional Science High School for the Central Visayas region.


== History ==
The regional science high school of NIR, RTPM Dumaguete Science High School, started as a single level and single-class high school temporarily occupying an area within the campus of the Dumaguete City High School in Calindagan. It moved to its permanent school site in Villa Amada, on land donated by Ramon Teves-Pastor, in 1991 and has since grown from a single classroom within other city schools to a complete high school of more than 40 students. It is Located near Villa Amada subdivision. It is one of the top High schools in the region.


== Socorro Building ==
The newest building of RTPM-DSHS which is primarily used as a science laboratory but now is also used for the second year classes. It was started to constructed on March 23, 2009 and finished on August 23, 2009. It was named after the co-owner of the school, the late Socorro Pastor Y Patero.


== Library ==
The school library is located near the gate of RTPM-DSHS. The current librarian of RTPM-DSHS is Melinda C. Favor. Mrs. Melinda C. Favor specializes in teaching Technical Writing which is a form of technical communication, or simply, a style of formal writing used in fields as diverse as computer hardware and software, chemistry, the aerospace industry, robotics, finance, consumer electronics, and biotechnology. Technical writers explain technology and related ideas to technical and nontechnical audiences. This could mean, for example, telling a programmer how to use a software library or telling a consumer how to operate a television remote control.


== Principal ==
The current principal is Mrs. Gina S. Anqui.


== Students ==
Ramon Teves Pastor Memorial - Dumaguete Science High School consist of four year levels namely Discoverers, Seekers, Probers, and Researchers. As of 2015, the Grade 7 Students are identified as Probers, the Grade 8 Students are identified as Analysts, the Grade 9 Students are identified as Discoverers, and the Grade 10 Students are identified as Researchers. The students are called Duscians.

Class Sections: