Montréal (06) is one of the administrative regions of Quebec, Canada.
It is also a territory equivalent to a regional county municipality (TE) and a census division (CD), for both of which its geographical code is 66. Prior to the merger of the municipalities in Region 06 in 2002, the administrative region was co-extensive with the Montreal Urban Community.
Located in the southern part of the province, the territory includes several of the islands of the Hochelaga Archipelago in the Saint Lawrence River, including the Island of Montreal, Nuns' Island (Île des Sœurs), Île Bizard, Saint Helen's Island (Île Sainte-Hélène), Île Notre-Dame, Dorval Island (Île Dorval), and several others.
The region is the second-smallest (499.19 km², or 192.74 sq mi) and most populous (1,854,442 at 2006 census) of Quebec's seventeen administrative regions.


== Montreal Agglomeration Council ==
It consists of the 2002–2005 territory of the city of Montreal, and is coextensive with the Urban Agglomeration of Montreal (French: Agglomération de Montréal). Following merger of all the municipalities of the agglomeration into one on January 1, 2002, sixteen of its municipalities were reconstituted on January 1, 2006. The urban agglomeration is governed by the Montreal Agglomeration Council (French: Conseil d'agglomération de Montréal).
The executive of the urban agglomeration is the agglomeration council. The weighting of votes for the council breaks down to 87% for the City of Montreal, and 13% for the other municipalities of the Island of Montreal.


== Subdivisions ==
Cities
Baie-d'Urfé
Beaconsfield
Côte Saint-Luc
Dollard-des-Ormeaux
Dorval
Hampstead
Kirkland
L'Île-Dorval
Montreal (Montréal in French)
Borough of Ahuntsic-Cartierville
Borough of Anjou
Borough of Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grâce
Borough of L'Île-Bizard–Sainte-Geneviève
Borough of LaSalle
Borough of Lachine
Borough of Le Plateau-Mont-Royal
Borough of Le Sud-Ouest
Borough of Mercier–Hochelaga-Maisonneuve
Borough of Montréal-Nord
Borough of Outremont
Borough of Pierrefonds-Roxboro
Borough of Rivière-des-Prairies–Pointe-aux-Trembles
Borough of Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie
Borough of Saint-Laurent
Borough of Saint-Léonard
Borough of Verdun
Borough of Ville-Marie
Borough of Villeray–Saint-Michel–Parc-Extension

Montréal-Est
Montreal West (Montréal-Ouest in French)
Mount Royal (Mont-Royal in French)
Pointe-Claire
Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue
Westmount
Village
Senneville


== See also ==

List of regional county municipalities and equivalent territories in Quebec


== References ==


== External links ==
Portail régional de Montréal (official website)
Montréal region Statistics Canada