The long-running science fiction television series Doctor Who has over the years been the subject of many comedy sketches and specially made comedy programmes, from Spike Milligan's "Pakistani Dalek" to the Comic Relief episode Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death. There have been occasional parodies and references to Doctor Who on American TV shows such as Community, Saturday Night Live, The Simpsons, Late Night with Conan O'Brien, Robot Chicken, and The Colbert Report. What follows below is a chronological list of Doctor Who parody, categorized by medium:


== TelevisionEdit ==


=== It's a Square World (1963)Edit ===
The first known televised Doctor Who spoof was on the Michael Bentine sketch show It's a Square World in December 1963, only a few weeks after the series first aired. Season 6, Episode 8, broadcast on New Year's Eve, featured Clive Dunn playing a scientist called Doctor Fotheringown ("Doctor Who?" / "No, not Doctor Who, Doctor Fotheringown!"), for which Dunn wore William Hartnell's First Doctor costume and wig. The sketch, which was recorded on 16 and 20 December 1963, also featured Wilfrid Brambell and Patrick Moore.


=== Big Night Out (1964)Edit ===
Hosted by Mike and Bernie Winters, Big Night Out was an ITV variety show. A skit entitled Doctor Shmoo, featuring Bernie as the Doctor and Mike as his unnamed companion together facing two stylised Daleks, began the edition that aired on 7 April 1964. Both males are referred to as "Earthlings" by one of the Daleks, while the Doctor calls the TARDIS a rocket. The overlaid graphic for the skit's title used a font very similar to that employed for Doctor Who's own title graphic, with the standard theme music being used unchanged at the start of the sketch.


=== Dave Allen at Large (1970s)Edit ===
The sketch/sitdown comedy series starring Irish comic Dave Allen featured several Who parodies throughout its long run. A prominent example originally aired in the early 1970s – an Irish country priest is tidying up his church, then quickly becomes aware that the baptismal font (which is roughly cylindrical, with a wide base and a domed top) is following him. As the cleric quickens his pace down the nave, the font charges after him screaming in metallic tones, "Exterminate! Exterminate! Annihilate! Destroy!" The priest ducks behind the pulpit, which then dematerializes (accompanied by the familiar TARDIS sound effects).


=== Crackerjack (1960s-1970s)Edit ===
This children's game/comedy sketch show featured several Who parodies, notably 1974's 'Ello My Dalek!, including Don MacLean as the Fourth Doctor and Peter Glaze as Lethbridge-Stewart, and notably no appearance from Harry Sullivan as he is "having his duffle-coat surgically removed".


=== Pakistani Dalek (1975)Edit ===
Spike Milligan's television sketch show Q contained a memorable sketch in which a Dalek returns to its suburban home from a bad day at work and proceeds to exterminate things that irritate, including commuters on the tube – even demanding that his wife, in the trademark Dalek staccato, to "Put [the family dog] in the curry!"


=== The Goodies (1975, 1980)Edit ===
In the British comedy series The Goodies, there were Doctor Who spoofs in at least two episodes.
In the episode "Invasion of the Moon Creatures", Tim tells Graeme that he must telephone home, and Bill points to a telephone box floating past (actually the Doctor's TARDIS).
In the episode "U-Friend or UFO?", when Graeme asks his robot EB-GB, "How do you speak to aliens?", EB-GB replies "Exterminate!" in a Dalek voice.


=== Emu's Broadcasting Company (1977)Edit ===
In the British children's comedy series, there was a Doctor Who spoof in at least two episodes.
In the segment "Doctor Emu and the Deadly Dustbins", Rod Hull and his puppet Emu appear dressed as the fourth Doctor, who travel in a normal red British public telephone box. They land on Earth and deal with a race of public dustbins, which eat people (in a way which was later seen in the series itself when Mickey Smith is consumed by a wheelie bin in the episode "Rose"). In a later series, the pair starred in "The Return of the Deadly Dustbins".


=== End of Part One (1979)Edit ===
In the British comedy series End of Part One, the one-off "Doctor Eyes" sketch parodied the low-budget nature of Doctor Who featuring bad special effects and poor acting. Ironically, End of Part One director Geoffrey Sax would later also direct the Doctor Who Movie.


=== The Two RonniesEdit ===
An episode of the long-running comedy show The Two Ronnies spoofed Doctor Who in a sketch called "The Adventures of Archie". Ronnie Corbett, as the eponymous character, becomes trapped in the past but is able to return to the twentieth century in the TARDIS after the Doctor turns up. Ronnie Barker played Jon Pertwee's Doctor as the scarecrow Worzel Gummidge, Pertwee's other famous television role.
In another sketch, parodying Star Wars, both Ronnies portray robots which claim that, once filming is over, "we'll end up as walk-ons on Doctor Who"; they are then chased ("Redecorate! Redecorate!") by two enormous cans of Dulux paint that have acquired the mind and appendages of Daleks.


=== The Krankies Elektronik KomikEdit ===
An episode of the "The Krankies Elektronik Komik" spoofed Doctor Who in a sketch. They land on a planet in the TARDIS, encounter an alien, and sing a song. Ian Tough played "Dr. Why", while Janette Krankie played his companion.


=== The Lenny Henry Show (1986)Edit ===
A sketch on The Lenny Henry Show featured Lenny Henry as the (newly regenerated) Doctor alongside Peri. The two land on Earth in the year 2010 and encounter the Cybermen and their leader "Thatchos" (a Cyberleader with a Margaret Thatcher wig and handbag); the Doctor's response is to "run up and down lots of corridors".
This sketch was included as an extra on the video release of Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death and also on the Trial of a Time Lord DVD release.


=== French & Saunders (1987)Edit ===
An unaired sketch filmed for French & Saunders featured Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders as bored extras in Silurian costumes during the filming of a Doctor Who serial that resembles The Trial of a Time Lord. They eventually disrupt filming so much that the floor manager tells them that all Silurians can have a tea break. Unfortunately, their version of the Inquisitor also happens to come from the planet Siluria, and walks off the set as well. The spoof was recorded on the set for "The Trial of a Time Lord".
George Layton played the Doctor, which had the look of the Fourth. The segment was included as an extra on the video release of Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death and also on the Vengeance on Varos special edition DVD release.


=== Victoria Wood As Seen On TV (1987)Edit ===
Victoria Wood As Seen On TV featured a brief sketch in which Jim Broadbent (later to appear in The Curse of Fatal Death) appears as a Tom Baker-style Doctor and comes up against a villain called Crayola. The sketch parodies the technobabble of the show, and the number of continuity references later episodes of the series had.
The segment was included as an extra on the video release of Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death and also on The Greatest Show in the Galaxy DVD release.


=== Fast Forward (1990)Edit ===
The Australian sketch comedy show Fast Forward featured several sketches which combined political satire with a spoof of Doctor Who.
The sketches featured "Doctor Hewson" (played by Steve Vizard), who was an amalgam of the Fourth Doctor and the then-Australian Federal Opposition Leader, Dr John Hewson; Lylo (played by Marg Downey), based on Leela; a rubber alien, who after removing his rubber head was revealed to be the recurring character "Bruce Rump" (spoof of Bruce Ruxton); Davros with the head of then-opposition MP John Howard; and a disembodied voice called "Time Lord Malcolm", who had lost his trousers (former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser famously appeared in an American hotel lobby sans trousers in 1986). Davros was also towing a crude imitation K-9.
Doctor Hewson's mission was to find a new immigration policy, which he eventually took from some graffiti spray-painted on the "Retardis": "Two wongs don't make a white." (however, Hewson says "two wogs" instead of "two wongs"); The implication is that Bruce Rump was responsible for the graffiti, as he is seen carrying a spray can.
The sketches appear in Series 2, Episode 10 – which can be found on Disc 3 of "Fast Forward: The Complete Season Two".


=== The Real McCoyEdit ===
The BBC sketch show The Real McCoy featured a sketch using redubbed footage from the serial Earthshock. In a scene where the Fifth Doctor confronts the Cyberleader, the two characters speak in Jamaican Creole, with the Doctor telling the Cyberleader "You no look like no Dalek to me".
This sketch was included as an "Easter Egg" on the DVD release of Earthshock.


=== The Corridor Sketch (1991)Edit ===
The Corridor Sketch was made by Reeltime Pictures. Its credits do not include a scriptwiter, but list "Cast & Crew" as gag writers and Kevin Davies as script editor. It was produced by Keith Barnfather.
It takes the form of a mockumentary, with Nicholas Briggs as a reporter visiting the set of Doctor Who on the first day of filming on 9 August 1963 (although the actual first day was on 20 August and what is being filmed appears to be Episode 1 of The Daleks).
The sketch includes several references to popular stories about the early days of the show. For example, "Sidney Newbaum" (Sydney Newman) assures the interviewer there will be no bug-eyed monsters, at which point a Dalek wrapped in brown paper gets wheeled across the corridor.
The sketch ends with the Director General of the BBC (played by Nicholas Courtney) predicting the series will last "twenty-six years, one week and six days" (the exact length of time the original series did run from its debut on 23 November 1963 until its final episode on 6 December 1989). The credits then run over a reversed version of the theme tune.
It appears as an extra on The Beginning DVD box set, alongside the three 1999 Doctor Who Night sketches.


=== The Fourth Doctor sells New Zealand investments (1997)Edit ===
In his autobiography, Tom Baker writes, "'Would you like to go to New Zealand to do a commercial?' That's the sort of question an actor likes to hear from his agent in freezing mid-January."
Consequently, in January 1997, Tom Baker did an advertisement for New Zealand television, spoofing his own portrayal of the Fourth Doctor and advising viewers to plan for their financial future. He points out how the audience does not "need a sonic screwdriver or a Gallifreyan time capsule" to figure out that New Zealand Superannuation Services are a reasonable way to make their future dreams realities.
The 30-second spot licensed not just the Fourth Doctor's appearance, but the console room and a version of the show's theme music similar to that of the Seventh Doctor's. It ended on a scene of the TARDIS amongst New Zealand sheep.


=== Beadle's Hotshots (1997)Edit ===
An edition of Beadle's Hotshots featured a sketch entitled Doctor What who travelled in space and time with his companion in his machine, called the BARDIS (Beverage And Refrigerator Dispenser In Space, which was a pub on the inside) and fighting his enemies the Headmaster (a take on The Master) and the Cyberbins (named after the Cybermen but basically Dalek Dustbins) before popping in to N.I.T. HQ and meeting the Brigadier. Frequently, the Doctor would regenerate but kept putting on false noses, silly wigs each time. After the sketch, Jeremy Beadle brought on Sylvester McCoy to met the actors, commenting that he enjoyed the sketch, especially the girl's screaming.


=== Harry Enfield and Chums (1997)Edit ===
A one-off sketch in the second series of Harry Enfield and Chums parodied the then-recent casting of Liverpudlian actor Paul McGann as the Doctor in the 1996 TV movie. A workman stands next to a ladder in an otherwise abandoned TV studio, when suddenly the TARDIS appears, and out steps Gary Bleasdale's "Gary Scouser" character (one of Enfield's popular trio of stereotypical Scouser characters), dressed in the Fourth Doctor's coat, scarf and hat. The workman asks "Who are you?", to which Gary replies "I'm Doctor Who Are You Lookin' At?" He then headbutts the workman, and begins to rant "Come on then, where's all these friggin' Daleks, eh? I'll bleedin' exterminate yez!" as the Doctor Who music fades in.


=== TV Offal (1997)Edit ===
TV Offal, a creation of Victor Lewis Smith had the Gay Daleks as recurring characters. They came from the planet Maskaro and travelled in a flying portoloo known as the TURDIS. They also had pink livery and often sported handbags slung-over their plunger-arm, as well as distinctly un-Dalek-like phraseology such as "BITCH". Each episode ended with an aroused Dalek ejaculating (sometimes preceded by "I AM GOING TO EX-SPERMINATE!"), repeating in the metallic voice the phrase "WHITE WEE WEE!"; In the Pilot dubbed clips from Destiny of the Daleks were used instead.
After the first (and only) series the estate of Terry Nation, creator of the Daleks, refused to renew the license. Later attempts at reviving the Gay Daleks as an animated series were also blocked.


=== Red Dwarf (1997)Edit ===
A television special to celebrate the series. Many cast and crewmembers, fans and celebrities, such as Patrick Stewart, offer an opinion on the popular British sci-fi comedy series. In one skit, a couple of Daleks being interviewed disapprove of the series. They dismiss it as human propaganda, along with Earth television in general. However, one of them then begins to compliment Red Dwarf on its jokes. The other one takes notice of its associate having a sense of humour and, naturally, exterminates it on the spot.


=== Shooting Stars (1997)Edit ===
Series 3, Episode 2 featured a sketch featuring the first four Doctors as the original members of the band The Who -
The Third Doctor/Jon Pertwee as Roger Daltrey (played by Vic Reeves)
The Fourth Doctor/Tom Baker as Pete Townshend (played by Mark Lamarr)
The First Doctor/William Hartnell as John Entwistle (played by Bob Mortimer)
The Second Doctor/Patrick Troughton as Keith Moon (played by Matt Lucas)
They performed "My (Re)Generation" in a studio with TARDIS-like roundels forming part of the set. This sketch formed part of a question for Janet Street-Porter posed by host Vic Reeves: "Who is the current Doctor Who?", who at the time was Paul McGann as the Eighth Doctor.


=== Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death (1999)Edit ===

An episode made for Comic Relief with celebrity appearances from Rowan Atkinson, Joanna Lumley, Hugh Grant, Richard E. Grant (later to appear in the webcast Scream of the Shalka and cast as Dr Simeon in the 2012 Christmas episode The Snowmen), and Jim Broadbent as various incarnations of the Doctor and Jonathan Pryce as the Master. The writer of the sketch, Steven Moffat, subsequently went on to become a writer and executive producer on the show proper following its 2005 revival.


=== Doctor Who Night (1999)Edit ===
On 13 November 1999, BBC Two showed various Doctor Who-related material interspersed with sketches and documentaries, under the title "Doctor Who Night". The night featured three sketches by writer Mark Gatiss, who has gone on to write several episodes of the revived series of Doctor Who, as well as starring in "The Lazarus Experiment" (2007). These sketches were co-written and performed with David Walliams.
In The Pitch of Fear, Walliams appears as Sydney Newman and Gatiss as fictional BBC executive "Mr Borusa" in a spoof about the early history of Doctor Who, which also features Paul Putner.
The Web of Caves, which is in black and white, sees Walliams and Putner as aliens (somewhat similar in appearance to Movellans) trying to persuade the Doctor (Gatiss) to defeat their schemes. The Walliams alien appears alone at first and outlines his scheme to hollow out the core of the Earth and replace it with a motor; the Doctor dismisses this plan, in a rather bored fashion, as having been done, and the alien suggests he will come back the next day with a new plan. The next day he returns, accompanied by the Putner alien, and proposes to drain the world's oceans into its core thus boiling them away; again the Doctor points out that it has been done, but decides he has to stop them. The two aliens and the Doctor agree on a time for their battle and the Doctor leaves in the TARDIS, only to have it rematerialise in the same spot, leaving the Doctor visibly annoyed. He disappears back into the TARDIS, only to have the Walliams alien obliviously comment on how nice the Doctor is.
In The Kidnappers, Walliams abducts Peter Davison for Gatiss.
All three sketches were included as extras in the DVD box set Doctor Who: The Beginning (consisting of the first three serials of the programme). A reference in "The Pitch of Fear" to Doctors "towards the end" of the series being played by "just any old f**ker with an Equity card" had deeply offended both Colin Baker and Sylvester McCoy when it was first broadcast.
Gatiss gave permission for the sketch to be included on the DVD only on condition that the lines be cut, saying that he knew it was a mistake as soon as he saw it broadcast.


=== Dead Ringers (2000–2009)Edit ===
One of the most prolific sources of Doctor Who-related parody in recent years has been the radio and television programme Dead Ringers. This is primarily due to comedian and impressionist Jon Culshaw and writer Nev Fountain, both of whom are Doctor Who fans. Culshaw often impersonates Tom Baker in character as the Fourth Doctor.
Dead Ringers (on radio)
In the radio programme, Culshaw often made live phone calls as the Doctor to everyday locations such as a hotel or DIY store, or to Doctor Who celebrities, and taped the unscripted responses.

Culshaw's "Doctor" has telephoned four of the "real" Doctors—Tom Baker, Peter Davison, Colin Baker, and Sylvester McCoy. This prompted the bemused (and apparently confused) McCoy to ask the classic question: "Have you been in the pub?" When Culshaw phoned Tom Baker himself and stated that he "was the Doctor", Baker replied, "But there must be some mistake...I'm the Doctor..." Baker had previously worked with Culshaw and was aware of his impression but not when the call would come, if at all, so his reaction was genuine. On the other hand, McCoy has said that his reaction was faked, as he had been warned immediately before the call took place. (Although, in an unpublished interview with Andrew Lawston, McCoy instead claimed he had just assumed that it was Tom Baker until the producers called afterwards to request permission to use the recorded call)

Culshaw's impression of the Fourth Doctor is now one of Dead Ringers' most recognizable trademarks, with the title credits (for the radio series and the TV series) now with the words "Dead Ringers" spoken by Culshaw in the recognizable voice.

Dead Ringers (on television)
When the programme moved to television, a now-visible Culshaw (in costume) was placed into mundane situations, such as the Fourth Doctor visiting a tanning salon and travelling on the Eurostar. At one point on his journey to France, Culshaw's "Doctor" stated to bemused passengers, "I am the Doctor. I travel in space and time.... and trains."

Though the Fourth Doctor was overwhelmingly the Doctor most imitated in the programme from 2000–2004, other Doctors also received treatment by the cast. With the coming of the 2005 series of Doctor Who, Dead Ringers added the most recent incarnations of the Doctor to its repertoire (for example, suggesting that Christopher Eccleston's real reason for leaving the programme was because his parents are hardcore Star Trek fans, which is possibly a parody of Star Trek fandom). The 2005 series trailer also parodied the "Do You Want To Come With Me?" trailers used to advertise the series; Eccleston's dialogue being spoken by impersonators of Tony Blair, Michael Howard and Charles Kennedy (due to BBC impartiality in the run-up to the 2005 General Election, all three political parties were represented).

In the 2005 Dead Ringers Christmas special, broadcast shortly before "The Christmas Invasion", centred around a Christmas get-together with the various incarnations of the Doctor, where Culshaw impersonated both the Fourth and Tenth Doctors, while the Second, Seventh, and Ninth Doctors were impersonated by Mark Perry, Kevin Connelly, and Phil Cornwell, respectively. The sketch also made reference to Christopher Eccleston's departure from the programme and displayed some antagonism between the Ninth and Tenth Doctors, with the Eccelston Doctor referring to himself as having depth and grit, then the Tenth as "Jarvis Cocker in space".

In Dead Ringers' 2006 series, Culshaw's Tenth Doctor was joined by Rose Tyler (portrayed by Jan Ravens) in two sketches. In one, the pair complained about the increasingly loud and intrusive music in the programme, and the Doctor was forced to use his sonic screwdriver to "turn on the subtitles, like everyone at home is doing." In another, the Doctor remarked how easy his job had become since he could learn all about his adventures beforehand from the Radio Times, Doctor Who Confidential, Totally Doctor Who and the TARDISODEs; since everything was revealed ahead of time, the Doctor said he could "phone the rest of the show in" and watch the World Cup (imminent at the time of the sketch's broadcast).

In addition to parodying Doctor Who, Dead Ringers has also parodied Torchwood. The sketches comment Torchwood's high level of sex, and low levels of characterization (denoting Owen, Ianto, Jack and Gwen by the traits of "annoying", "dull and annoying", "camp and annoying" and "Welsh" respectively). The final episode of the seventh series also featured two spoofs of Torchwood, one of which featured Jack Harkness in a threesome with three Cybermen in a hotel. The other was "Driftwood" (a cut scene would have explained that it filled the one demographic not touched by Doctor Who - having a family show, a children's show, and an adult's show). June Whitfield talks to the camera about the worry about leaving behind families in danger from monsters of other worlds. She says that Driftwood can help, and a team comprising four OAPs, including Victor Meldrew and Albert Steptoe (with the latter having a mysterious event in his past - an event called UK Gold - "that means I can never die").

In another sketch, Tony Blair (Culshaw) is seen giving an interview. He then stands up and collapses. A regeneration-like special effect is added, and Culshaw's Blair is replaced by David Tennant, who was playing the Tenth Doctor at the time. Tennant stands up, licks and sucks his teeth and says "Hmmm, New Labour, that's weird" (a parody of one of Tennant's first lines as the Doctor ("Hmmm, new teeth, that's weird") and Tony Blair's rebranding of the Labour party, calling it "New Labour"). David Tennant proceeds to make a speech in Tony Blair's early style.

Clips on the BBC website
Clips on the Gallifrey Archives


=== Kit Kat Advertisement (2001)Edit ===
A 2001 advertising campaign for Kit Kat chocolates showed celebrities doing things which were contrary to their popular images (for example, football player Roy Keane doing needlepoint, and Motörhead lead singer Lemmy playing the violin).
One of the first shots in the advertisement is of Daleks chasing people on the street saying, in the standard Dalek tones, "Give us a cuddle!" while the final shot had Daleks following a group of Hare Krishna devotees, chanting "Peace and love!" The advertisement concluded with the Kit Kat slogan "Have a break, have a Kit Kat," implying that the Daleks were having a break from their habitual killing.
The Daleks' use in this advert was brought to an end by the estate of Terry Nation, who had not been aware of the usage. The advertising agency had mistakenly believed that the creatures were in the public domain.


=== Hububb (2001)Edit ===
The fifth series of this BBC live action children's programme featured the episode "Dr Woo & the Kelads", written by Ben Keaton. In this episode, Mikey (Miltos Yerolemou) sees a wardrobe materialise in Rosa's Deliveries. A scarf-wearing doppelganger of series protagonist Les (Les Bubb) emerges. He introduces himself as Dr Woo and reveals that he is Les from the future. In order to become a Time Lord, he must capture the leader of the Kelads, alien invaders who resemble plastic wheelie-bins. After Mikey and Woo defeat a Kelad army with disinfectant spray, the Kelads betray their leader by tricking him into hiding in the wardrobe, allowing Woo to capture him.


=== Do You Have a Licence to Save this Planet? (2001)Edit ===
This BBV production starred Sylvester McCoy as the Foot Doctor doing battle against the Krynoids, Sontarans, and Autons. It also parodied elements of the Seventh Doctor's tenure, including his incarnation's penchant for spoon-playing and his regeneration scene in Time and the Rani. The title was a reference to how BBV had never obtained a license from the BBC to produce official Doctor Who tie-in material and therefore had to create works that only narrowly avoided infringing the BBC's intellectual property rights.


=== Codename: Kids Next Door (2004, 2007)Edit ===
In this Cartoon Network series, the nerdier operatives enjoy a program called "Doctor Time Space and the Continuum". In the episode "Operation: U.N.C.O.O.L." Numbers 1, 3, 4, and 5 are captured and forced to watch the series, with Number 5 pleading for it to stop.
During the credits of the episode "Operation: A.M.I.S.H." a segment is presented featuring a man on an ultra-low budget set (parodying the budget of the series) wearing several long scarves (a parody of the Fourth Doctor) standing next to an equally low budget cardboard robot, which falls apart.


=== Late Night with Conan O'Brien (2005)Edit ===
In an episode of Late Night with Conan O'Brien, Conan brings out his cousin who is a fan of "the 1970s science fiction show Dr. Who" and only talks about things in terms of Doctor Who. When the cousin comes out (dressed as Tom Baker) and is asked a question, his unrelated response involves discussion traveling through time in the TARDIS with the Doctor.


=== Chewin' the Fat (2005)Edit ===
In a sketch from the 2005 Hogmanay edition of the BBC Scotland comedy series Chewin' the Fat, the character Ronald Villiers ("the world's worst actor") acts as an army soldier sent into a metal building to take on the Daleks. Villiers, however, keeps on messing up his lines and throwing in various ad-libs relating to Doctor Who.
After repeatedly failing to understand that the production crew are going to superimpose a Dalek onto the scene in the post-production stage, Villiers is thrown off set - but not before telling them that "All the Doctor Whos after Sylvester McCoy were rubbish anyway".


=== ANZ advertisement (2005)Edit ===
An advertisement for Australian and New Zealand bank ANZ (Australia and New Zealand Banking Group) was shown on television showing a customer call center operated by robots including Robot B-9 from Lost in Space and the Daleks.
After subsequent showings, the advertisement was later shortened to not feature the Daleks without permission due to complaints from the estate of Terry Nation.


=== Robot Chicken (2006, 2014)Edit ===
In the Adult Swim series Robot Chicken, the Fourth Doctor made an appearance, standing on the first base of a baseball diamond asking, "You get it?", a reference to the Abbott and Costello sketch "Who's on First?".
In the skit of the episode entitled "Suck It", a student begins to give a presentation about the TARDIS before being berated for his perceived geekiness.
In the last skit of the episode entitled, "Walking Dead Lobster", the Doctor appears at a convention to find a new companion and ends up with the Nerd. But the Doctor sends the Nerd back to his time when they are unable to get along.


=== The Chaser's War On Everything (2006)Edit ===
The 21 July 2006 episode of the Australian satirical comedy programme The Chaser's War On Everything contained a song making fun of Doctor Who fans; It was written and performed by Andrew Hansen, who is himself a Doctor Who fan.


=== The Charlotte Church Show (2006)Edit ===
The second episode of The Charlotte Church Show (broadcast on 8 September 2006) included a sketch in which Church played the Doctor's new companion. In the sketch, Church complained about travelling to Cardiff by TARDIS ("I can take the bloody bus!"). The sketch also noted the series' tendency to have "relationship-y episodes where somebody's gran's dying, that they use to pad out the middle of the series when they run out of money for special effects", referring to "that psychic girl with the crayons" as a "rubbish" example.
The sketch also showed the Doctor examining a scantily clad female mannequin, claiming he thought it was an Auton. At the end of the sketch, the Doctor regenerated into Todd Carty.


=== The Friday Night Project (2007)Edit ===
Tenth Doctor actor David Tennant appeared as host on the 5 January 2007 edition of Channel 4's The Friday Night Project. Tennant joined regulars Justin Lee Collins and Alan Carr in a number of jokes related to the show/role - including a short parody episode, which saw Collins as the Tenth Doctor, Tennant in drag as his female assistant and Carr as various Doctor Who villains. In the parody, Collins and Tennant travel to the "Pink Planet" to confront their biggest enemy, the Gay Lord (a parody of the Time Lords) and then the Carrleks (a parody of the Daleks).
Also, there was a fake charity Doctor Who auction in which two fans were pranked - one being made to pay a large sum of money for an item he hadn't intended to bid on, the other being led to believe the auction had stolen his one-of-a-kind prop of the Key to Time from the classic-series serial of the same name.
Later when the show's name was change to The Sunday Night Project, Catherine Tate who plays Donna Noble appeared as a guest host on 18 January 2009. While her time on the show, Tate joined both Justin and Alan in several parodies about the show, in one, Tate dressed as the Tenth Doctor while Collins and Carr take the role as Donna. At first, Carr makes the mistake of dressing like Catherine Tate's Lauren Cooper, then Collins wins the part when he wears a bride's dress.


=== Gina's Laughing Gear (2007)Edit ===
In this children's spoof show on CBBC, three sketches spoofing Doctor Who are shown. The first begins with the Doctor and Rose stepping out of the TARDIS into a darkened room. The Doctor, using his Sonic Screwdriver as a torch, reveals several aliens who are all blasted by Rose's ray gun. The Doctor then turns on the light and sees that they have materialised at a child dress-up party. The child then comes in. The Doctor and Rose wish him a happy birthday. He calls them to get a doctor. "Funny you should say that" says the Doctor.
In the second sketch, the shortest of the three, we hear the TARDIS materialise and the Doctor inquiring where they are. Then we hear a scream, as a woman runs out of a building. The Doctor apologises, just as the camera focuses on a sign for ladies toilets.
The third and final sketch starts with the Doctor stepping out of the TARDIS into Tim Westwood's (Pimp My Ride UK) garage. The Doctor asks if he is a Cyberman. Tim corrects him and says he is a DJ-man. The Doctor then recognizes this "alien that plays hip-hop music on the radio". Tim calls it old and a "TURDIS" and then says to the Doctor that he is going to "pimp his TARDIS". There are then several shots of mechanics attaching things to the TARDIS that are typical to Pimp My Ride (e.g. a customized number plate: T4RD15 and a disco ball where the normal light would be on top of the TARDIS). The Doctor doesn't mind as these are only cosmetic changes, but Tim has messed up the suspension and the Doctor dematerializes from the garage with the TARDIS jumping to different places in the garage.


=== The Omid Djalili Show (2007)Edit ===
In one sketch of the third episode of the first series, Omid Djalili plays a man desperate for fame who attends a children's party along with Freema Agyeman who plays companion Martha Jones. In the sketch, Djalili tries to get a role in Doctor Who by performing as the new Cybermen and the Daleks (he wears a helmet with a Dalek eyestalk on it). Because his performance scares the children, Agyeman is enraged and restrains him, but Djalili just quotes "I'm half human, half Dalek, I am your future!" (the line said at the end of Daleks in Manhattan), so she asks him what is his problem and he replies "Help me, I need to be famous"; she then headbutts him.


=== Extras (2007)Edit ===
In the Christmas special finale of Extras, Darren Lamb (Stephen Merchant) tells Andy Millman (Ricky Gervais) that he's been offered a part in "the BBC's jewel in the crown, Doctor Who", but Andy dismisses the show (along with Hotel Babylon) as "camp, frothy nonsense". Later in the episode, Andy gets a new agent who proposes roles in the same programmes, which Andy again rejects. However, after not working for five months (and telling his new agent, "I've told you a thousand times, I'm not going to play an alien in Doctor Who"), we see Andy opposite the Tenth Doctor (David Tennant), playing a slug-like alien named Schlong (in a rubbery costume, with Andy's face fully visible).
In the scene, "Schlong" attacks the Doctor and the young woman with something the Doctor first describes in technobabble as "hyperpodulating—he's using his molluscian gline valves to internally vibrillate our DNA!" and then explains that "we'll both turn into slugs in about thirty seconds unless I can reach that sodium chloride!" The Doctor throws the salt on the slug-creature, who collapses, foaming at the mouth.


=== Doctors (2008)Edit ===
In an episode of the ninth series in 2008, Sylvester McCoy made a guest appearance where he played a retired actor named Graham Capelli who played a time traveller in a television show called The Lollipop Man where he could travel through time with his traffic lollipop stick. Graham also has to provide commentary for the DVD release of the show.


=== The Sarah Silverman Program (2008)Edit ===
In one episode of the second season, Christopher Eccleston makes a guest appearance in which he plays the fictional main character from a long-running science fiction series called Dr. Lazer Rage.


=== Pinky and Perky (2009)Edit ===
Episode 34 of the CGI animation Pinky and Perky, broadcast 17 February 2009, was titled "Doctor Roo". The title refers to a time-travelling kangaroo dressed like the Tenth Doctor, who travels through time with his time-travelling pouch. Pinky thinks Dr Roo's TV show is real, and tries to travel back in time to save the world from the Robo-Sheep (which are based on Cybermen).


=== The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson (2010)Edit ===
Craig Ferguson dubbed the 16 November 2010 episode of The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson the "Doctor Who Episode", and began the show with a dance number to the tune of the Doctor Who theme, which had to be cut out due to not being able to get the legal rights to play the song. The show featured many Doctor Who references and jokes, including a Dalek alongside Craig's usual sidekick Geoff Petersen and a miniature TARDIS on Craig's desk. The guests were Chris Hardwick (who talked with Craig almost exclusively about Doctor Who) and the Eleventh Doctor, Matt Smith. The cut opening number was later broadcast in early 2011. In 2011, two other Doctor Who actors - Alex Kingston and Karen Gillan appeared on the programme, with Gillan making an encore appearance (along with Matt Smith, in a separate broadcast), in late July 2011. On 3 Aug. 2011 Smith made an unadvertised appearance in a pre-recorded segment at the end of the broadcast.


=== Harry & Paul (2010)Edit ===
One episode of Harry & Paul featured a sketch, split in two parts called On the TARDIS, which was a cross between Doctor Who and On the Buses. Stan Butler (Harry Enfield) played the Doctor while Jack Harper (Paul Whitehouse) was the companion. The pair were planning to flee from Olivia (finding her far more frightening than the Daleks) to go to the planet Raving Nympho to be with lots of girls. Instead, they land on the planet Woolly Woofter and encounter camp people. In Part 2, Blakely turned up as The Master before the lads got what they wanted: three gorgeous girls.


=== My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic (2010-)Edit ===
My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic features a pony character with tan fur, brown mane and tale, and an hourglass "Cutie Mark" who resembles actor David Tennant's Tenth Doctor. This has led to fans dubbing him "Doctor Whooves"; in official merchandise the character has been called "Time Turner" or "Doctor Hooves". While a minor character in the animated series, connected media has played up the connection, including featuring Doctor Who inspired variant covers and an alternate universe incarnation resembling Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor. He appears as a main character in the 100th episode "Slice of Life", where his personality is similar to that of the Tenth Doctor. He is also shown to be a scientist and wears the Fourth Doctor's iconic scarf.


=== National Television Awards opening scene (2011)Edit ===
A special 3-minute sketch was written by Steven Moffat, featuring Matt Smith and the TARDIS set, and broadcast on ITV1 on 26 January 2011 before the awards ceremony. Dermot O'Leary wakes up realising he has missed the ceremony he is presenting, and the Doctor helps him get there on time, meeting Dot Branning, Ant & Dec and Bruce Forsyth en route.


=== Community (2011-)Edit ===
During the episode "Biology 101", Britta searches for a new television series for Abed to watch. She eventually shows him a sci-fi series called Inspector Spacetime, a thinly veiled parody of Doctor Who. Troy and Abed have been seen watching Inspector Spacetime throughout the third season. The season four episode "Conventions of Space and Time" sees the group travel to a fan convention for the show. Inspector Spacetime has also found a following online, with an extensive TV Tropes article on the show, as well as standing-room-only panels at the Chicago TARDIS Convention in 2011 and Gallifrey One in 2012 and 2013.
A live-action web-series based on the character was proposed by actor Travis Richey, who portrayed the Inspector on screen, but NBC and Sony appeared uninterested. Undaunted, Richey began a Kickstarter to fund the series via fans, and one animated teaser episode was produced, at which point Sony lawyers requested the production be cancelled. However, the series continued with references to the name 'Inspector Spacetime' removed and the appearance of the character altered. It now exists as Untitled Web Series About a Space Traveler Who Can Also Travel Through Time, which received critical praise and was included in USA Today's Best Web TV of 2012 list.


=== Dorkly (2011)Edit ===
In the episode "Chrono Trigger Time Travel Mix-Up", the characters from the game Chrono Trigger meet the Doctor who tells them that Lavos was in fact a friendly being trying to return to its home planet.


=== Mad (2013)Edit ===
In the episode "Lone Rango / Doctor Who's Line is it Anyway?", the sketch "Doctor Who's Line is it Anyway?" features the animated likenesses of David Tennant, Matt Smith, and Whose Line Is It Anyway? star Wayne Brady in an improv game hosted by a Dalek. It's billed as "the show where everything is made up and the points don't matter - because you will all be exterminated!"


=== You're Skitting Me (2013)Edit ===
A recurring sketch appears called "Doctor Who Downunder" where the doctor regenerates into a Bogan. Other sketches feature him flying a bike through space, giving an invading alien a wedgie and brandishing a sonic sausage roll.


=== Toast of London (2013)Edit ===
In the episode "End", Steven Toast turns down a role in Doctor Who, citing a bad experience with the show. A flashback shows a scene from a Fourth Doctor serial with a masked Toast as an alien whose only line is "Yes." Tom Baker is played by Lewis MacLeod, who is credited as "Dr. Who".


=== The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot (2013)Edit ===
As part of the 50th anniversary programmes, former Fifth Doctor Peter Davison created, wrote and co-starred in a parody featuring cameos from several other former Doctors, companions and people involved in the programme.


== RadioEdit ==


=== I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again (1965, 1969)Edit ===
In episode 8 of the first full series, the main feature was a sketch called "Doctor Why and The Thing".
In Series Six there was a running sketch entitled "Professor Prune and His Electric Time Trousers", which was a send-up of Doctor Who.


=== Doctor Poo (1979-1981)Edit ===
"It's all cisterns go, with the amazing man who dares to go anywhere. Doctor Poooooooooo."
The brainchild of comedians Geoff Kelso, Lance Curtis, Steve Johnston and Ken Mathews, this Australian radio serial started airing on the Double Jay AM radio station in Sydney, migrating briefly to FM when the station became Triple J.
In the serial, a pompous and selfish alien called Doctor Poo (from the planet Galah-Free) travels through time and space in his TURDIS with his "beautiful, but stupid" assistant Dana Sock (a parody of many useless female companions on Doctor Who) and Dennis the Denim Cat (a possible parody of K-9), the homicidal moggie of the cat planet Felix Major.
The 2-minute radio show even had parodies of the Daleks (the Drecks and their creator Lavdros) as well as the Master (Doctor Wee, an "Asian stereotype"). The show also introduced us to Doctor Poo's wife, Constance.
Proceedings were narrated by Kevin the Announcer - who would continually talk to the characters and make disparaging comments about the show.
Lance Curtis played Doctor Poo, Geoff Kelso was Kevin the Announcer and Dennis the Denim Cat and Steve Matthews voiced Dana Sock (in falsetto). Minor characters in each two-minute episode were voiced by various members of the cast.
The series spawned two record releases, Knees Ahoy which was a compilation of one of the radio storylines, and Dr. Poo and the Psychic Koala's The Universe is Big, a musical LP recorded in 1981 but released in 1985, shortly after the death of Lance Curtis.
In late 1980, the Official Doctor Poo Fan Club numbered a membership over 10,000.
One storyline was replayed during the lunch breaks of a cricket test on 702 ABC in the mid eighties. This story, "The Dubbo and Western Plains French Revolution" included parodies of a number of cricket commentators.


=== Harry Hill's Fruit Corner (1993)Edit ===
An episode of the radio series entitled "Lords and Ladies" featured Jon Pertwee playing a Time Lord and the character Nana Hill spoofing the role of Davros, creator of the Daleks.
Another episode featured the Dalek singing trio (who were unable to complete any songs with the word "Doctor" in the lyrics without resorting to extermination). Harry also had a Dalek girlfriend who would phone him and refuse to hang up until he said "I will obey".


=== Whatever Happened to Susan Foreman? (1994)Edit ===
"Whatever Happened to Susan Foreman?" was a BBC Radio 4 comedy drama play, part of the series Whatever Happened to ..? The play followed a humorous account of Susan Foreman's life after she departed from the TARDIS, and featured Jane Asher in the role of Susan and Andrew Sachs as Temmosus Skyedron, a Thal. This play is included as an extra on The Dalek Invasion of Earth DVD.


=== Nebulous (2005-2006)Edit ===
The BBC Radio 4 comedy series Nebulous (written by Graham Duff, directed by Nicholas Briggs, and starring Mark Gatiss) parodies many elements of Doctor Who. The eponymous Professor Nebulous is a very Doctor-ish character, while the organization K.E.N.T. echoes UNIT.
The Premiere ("The Night of the Vegetarians") has a Cactus villain reminiscent of Meglos; Episode #2 ("The Loverly Invasion") is clearly based on The Claws of Axos with a race of beautiful aliens arriving on Earth; Finally, the recurring villain Doctor Klench brings to mind the Master - even going as far as carrying around his miniaturized victims (still living) with him.
The audio CD of Series One includes in the liner notes a list of "missing episodes", a reference to the notorious missing Doctor Who episodes; Among the episodes listed are "Genesis of the Faceless Ambassadors of Fury" (a story which mimics Genesis of the Daleks while its title combines Genesis, The Faceless Ones, The Ambassadors of Death, and Fury From The Deep) and "The Farmers" (which draws parallels to the less-popular "historical" episodes of Doctor Who).


=== Doctor What? (2006)Edit ===
Doctor What? was a radio show on SYN 90.7, a youth community radio station in Melbourne, Australia. In this show the hosts (changed on a weekly basis), would pick a part of time and talk about it; at the end a 2-minute radio play would be performed based around the Doctor and the hosts in their chosen period of time.


=== Doctor Wee! (2013)Edit ===
Doctor Wee! is a Geordie comedic parody of Doctor Who that appears weekly on the Matthew Hutton Radio Experiment on HFM Hemel Radio in London. Doctor Wee! Is a much cruder version of the BBC character who carries a sonic pint glass which is used to smash over the head of his foes.


=== United Trek Federation spot (2007)Edit ===
The spot advertising for the fictional United Trek Federation was a spot on Darker Projects, premiering on the sixth third season episode of Star Trek: The Section 31 Files called Invasion, Part III - Warday. In this spot, an announcer says "How many times does this happen to you?", followed by the two geeks downloading a possible new Star Trek episode (Hidden Frontier or Section 31) available. Instead, they stumbled upon Doctor Who, and attempts to free the computer unsuccessful as it detonated, marking "another tragic act of computer terrorism at the hands of the Who World Order." The announcer then asks: "Do you wake up in the middle of the night, wondering today's the day the forces of the Who World Order will come knocking on your door, to drag you off to their Who Relocation Camps?" It is then the United Trek Federation is introduced. What happens next is that a young woman (voiced by Kara Dennison) shouting her Trek DVDs have been stolen by some Dinomonster. This particular agent is being intercepted by the UTF agent who's there for her, and the stolen DVDs are recovered back. It concludes with the line: "With the United Trek Federation, you can sleep easily. Knowing the monsters of the Who World Order have at last met their match. United Trek Federation. We are here to protect you!"


== FilmEdit ==


=== Carry On Screaming! (1966)Edit ===
In this spoof horror film, one of the Carry On... film series, Kenneth Williams plays a scientist named "Dr Watt". At one point in the film another character responds to this name with the question "Doctor who?", to which Watt replies "No, Watt. Who's my uncle."
Carry On Screaming also features Jon Pertwee, who later played the Third Doctor, as a police scientist and Peter Butterworth who earlier played the Meddling Monk.


=== U.F.O. (1993)Edit ===
Roy "Chubby" Brown, playing himself in this sci-fi comedy, is placed in a museum by a group of hyper-feminist aliens as an example of outdated attitudes towards women. He soon tries to escape, and is pursued by guards into a police exhibition, where he hides himself in a Police Box. The guards demand that he come out of the box...only for it to dematerialize, revealing it as the TARDIS.
As the TARDIS travels though space and time, Chubby comments that "there's a series in this," causing the Doctor (voiced by Paul Barber, in an imitation of Tom Baker) to remark that "it's been done." Chubby is then dropped off in prehistoric times (represented by a quarry similar to those used in the show) by the TARDIS, which dematerializes after he gets out, leaving him in a close encounter with a T-Rex as the film ends.
The film co-stars Roger Lloyd-Pack, who would subsequently go on to play John Lumic in the revived series.


=== Looney Tunes: Back in Action (2003)Edit ===
The heroes walk into the hidden base of "Area 52", the real name of Area 51, which is a facade to hide Area 52. This scene features cameos from various vintage science fiction movies: Robby the Robot from the film Forbidden Planet, the title character from Robot Monster, a Triffid, a bug-mutant from This Island Earth and many others.
The alien cyborgs yelling "Exterminate them!" are Daleks from the British sci-fi series Doctor Who; more precisely, the models used are from the non-canon films Dr. Who and the Daleks and Daleks - Invasion Earth 2150 AD (distinguishable from the TV versions by the "vapor spray" weapon, although there seems to got circle-shaped death-Ray with it). It was at the insistence of Steve Martin that Daleks be used in that scene. This was the cause of a minor legal issue as the Daleks are owned by the estate of Terry Nation and are not in the public domain as was assumed.


=== Dr. Loo and the Filthy Phaleks (2005)Edit ===
A pornographic film featuring Alicia Rhodes as Dr. Loo, who travels through time and space in her TURDIS, a time machine disguised as a public toilet. She and her trusty female shagbot get into numerous sexual adventures including run ins with the evil Empress Minge the Merciless and her army of ruthless robot killers, the Phaleks.


=== Abducted by the Daloids/Abducted by the Daleks (2005)Edit ===
An unauthorized sexploitation feature, Abducted by the Daloids (although the disc itself uses "Daleks"). In the film, the "Daloids" (portrayed by several Dalek models) abduct four scantily clad strippers (played by five women - four who spoke English with thick East European accents, and one with a strong Ulster one).
The BBC took action to prevent sale of the DVD upon learning of it in November 2005. Despite this action, the film was leaked onto the internet.
While originally sold/released as "Abducted by the Daleks", in a limited edition of 1000, after the BBC’s action the film was re-released with the "Daloids" title, in another "limited edition" of 2000 though technically the film still infringes on copyright laws by using Dalek characters.


== Video gamesEdit ==


=== Hugo II, Whodunit? (1991)Edit ===
In this DOS video game, the player uses a telephone booth to travel to the planet Retupmoc where she meets a man who looks like Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor and identifies himself as "the Doctor". A "mechanical monster" appears to be a Dalek, and the phone booth looks like the TARDIS. The Doctor gives the player a "sonar screwdriver" for rescuing him.


=== Destroy All Humans! 2 (2006)Edit ===
Part of this video game takes place in "Albion" (Britain). On this level, when the main character (Crypto) terrorizes humans in his true form, their screams include the cries "Someone call the Doctor!" and "Where the hell's the bleedin' TARDIS?"


=== Rock Band (2007)Edit ===
In this video game (and its two sequels), a top purchased with one of the game's stores for the game's characters is named "Doctor What". The piece of clothing features both a scarf and long coat, a reference to the Fourth Doctor.
The description reads as follows: "Traveling in time or just touring the Neighborhood, this long jacket and scarf combo won't let you down."


== Print mediaEdit ==


=== Poot! (Current, 1980s and 1990s)Edit ===
The British adult comic Poot! features a character called Desmond Hoo who thinks he is Doctor Who and that his wardrobe is the TARDIS.


=== ALF (1991)Edit ===
The story "Timing Is Everything!" in Issue 38 of Marvel Comics' ALF comic featured ALF's encounter with a time traveller named "Doctor Whozonfirst", who was somewhat a Melmacian version of the Fourth Doctor.


=== Viz Magazine (1995)Edit ===

The British adult spoof comic magazine Viz featured a one-page comic strip, "Doctor Poo", in 1995. It features the increasingly desperate attempts of Doctor Poo (looking like the Fourth Doctor but with Jamie as a companion) to find a quiet place to defecate.


=== Futurama ComicsEdit ===
Issue #32 is a direct spoof of Doctor Who, with Dr. Zoidberg as the Doctor. Also in one sequence of the comic, the "Deacons" were basically parodies of Daleks, which fire weapons out of their eyestalks at Fry, Leela, and Bender shouting "Excommunicate! Excommunicate!" (a parody of the Daleks' "Exterminate!" battle cry).


=== Dalek Survival Guide (2002)Edit ===
Dalek Survival Guide was a humorous book published by BBC Books and written by Justin Richards, Nicholas Briggs (who provides voice acting for the Daleks in the 2005 series), Stephen Cole, Jacqueline Rayner and Mike Tucker.
Parodying The Worst-Case Scenario Survival Handbooks, the Dalek Survival Guide gives wry hints such as how Daleks work, how to recognise different Dalek variants, "How to survive enforced captivity with a Dalek" and "What to do if you see a Dalek".
This book became the subject of legal action due to copyright issues. However, the issues were ruled against, and the book continues to be sold.


=== The TARDIS at Pooh Corner (2002)Edit ===
Peter David's crossover fanfiction "The TARDIS at Pooh Corner" features Doctor Pooh, a Time Lord of very little brain. In his brief adventures he meets further characters from Winnie the Pooh and other franchises. It was originally published in a magazine, and republished on David's website in 2002.


=== Bunny Suicides (2004/2010)Edit ===
Characters and objects from the franchise are use twice in the black comedy book by Andy Riley.
A drawing in Return of the Bunny Suicides features the Fourth Doctor escaping a Dalek as he runs into the TARDIS. On top of the TARDIS is a bunny with a slipknot tied round its neck in order to hang itself once the TARDIS has dematerialized.
A later installment, Dawn of the Bunny Suicides, a two-page-sequence shows the Eleventh Doctor walking into the TARDIS when a bunny jumps into the TARDIS doors at the last second jamming its head in between the two door, so when the TARDIS dematerializes it will decapitate him.


=== The Areas of My Expertise (2005)Edit ===

John Hodgman's book makes references to Doctor Who in several places. In the beginning, where (made up) literary themes are being discussed, a still from The Wheel in Space is used to illustrate the theme of "Man vs. Cyborg".
In a later section listing the names of hobos, one is "The Nine Doctor Whos". In the same section, a "Hobo Pictogram" is stated as meaning "A house that is bigger on the inside than the outside".


=== The Beano (2006)Edit ===
Beginning in their 21 April issue, The Beano ran a three-part parody comic-within-a-comic by writer-artist Kev F Sutherland called "Hot-Rod Cow", about a superhero time-travelling talking cow. "Hot-Rod Cow" is the favourite comic of The Bash Street Kids character, Plug. The comic contained many in-jokes, for example Hot-Rod Cow wielded a "Sonic Moo-driver". The phrase "Hot-Rod Cow" is, like Torchwood, an anagram of the phrase "Doctor Who". The comic also spoofed classic comic covers such as Amazing Fantasy #15 (Spider-Man's first appearance) as well as containing other superhero related jokes. Later, a Dalek won a fancy dress competition in a Les Pretend story, and another Dalek attacked the Bash Street Kids in BeanoMAX Issue 1 - the Doctor appeared in his TARDIS to take it away.


=== Doctor Whom: E.T. Shoots and Leaves (2006)Edit ===
Doctor Whom: E.T. Shoots and Leaves (ISBN 978-0-575-07928-1) is a book by A. R. R. R. Roberts, author of The Soddit. It parodies Doctor Who and Eats, Shoots & Leaves by Lynne Truss. The book is subtitled "E. T. shoots and leaves: The zero-tolerance approach to parodication".
It briefly mentions the Daleks ("Garleks"), the Cybermen ("Cydermen"), and the Master ("The Master Debater"); another aspect of this book is how it mentions a philosophy by which parody is evolution, and those who are against parody are against evolution and thus the very basis of life - this turns out to be the keystone of the book.


=== Under Torch Wood (2006)Edit ===
Satirical technology columnist Verity Stob wrote a parody of Torchwood in the style of Dylan Thomas' radio play Under Milk Wood. This parody described Captain Jack Harkness as "the insomniac bicon; snug as a hobbit, pretty as a choirboy, immortal as carbon dioxide, wooden as a horse" and included a café sign reading "Llanfairfach giant maggots, fresh in today! Organic? Of course!" (a reference to The Green Death).


=== Ctrl+Alt+Del (2010)Edit ===
Published on 2 July 2010, the online gaming-related webcomic published a comic based on the rumors about the possibility of an American Doctor Who film. The one frame comic has the Doctor played by Jason Statham holding a gun and hanging outside the TARDIS on a speed chase with guns and rockets firing at it.


=== Tractor Who (2012)Edit ===
Tractor Who is a Spanish parody comic published by Ruleta Rusa and Fandogamia. It features the Tractor, the last of the Time Farmers, who travels through space and time with his companions in the Retardis, a blue tractor shaped time machine which is smaller on the inside. Its first issue features a bunch of gipsy burglar statues as the main villains.


=== What's New, Scooby Doo? (2014)Edit ===
An issue of What's New, Scooby Doo? involves a fan convention at which fans are seen lining up to meet one of several actors to play a character who is an obvious parody of the Doctor.


=== Mega Man (Archie Comics) (2014)Edit ===
A convention exclusive cover for Archie Comics' Mega Man issue 41 features a Comic Con inspired scene which includes a large poster of the character Dr. Cossack with the words "Doctor Whom?" across the bottom.


== StageEdit ==


=== Bottom Live: Weapons Grade Y-Fronts Tour (2003)Edit ===
In the final stage show based on the comedy show Bottom written by Rik Mayall and Adrian Edmondson, Richie is concerned about Eddie, whom he hasn't seen for weeks. As it turns out, Eddie has been busy with his latest invention: a time travelling toilet which he names the Turdis. The ship's dematerialisation noise consists of the original TARDIS sound effect with the noise of flatulence and flushing toilets mixed in, and it can only be recharged when someone masturbates inside it.


=== Chuckle Brothers (2006)Edit ===
In 2006 the Chuckle Brothers, a British comedy duo, toured the UK with their show Doctor What and the Return of the Garlics. Russell T Davies, the showrunner of the new Doctor Who series, wrote three episodes of the duo's long-running Children's BBC television series ChuckleVision in 1992.


== MusicEdit ==


=== I'm Gonna Spend My Christmas with a Dalek (1964)Edit ===
Perhaps one of the first parodies from Doctor Who was a song released the first Christmas after The Daleks was initially broadcast. The British Go-Go's Christmas novelty single tried to turn the sinister Daleks into another version of The Chipmunks, and was originally released as one of the many products fueling Dalekmania.
However, as that craze fizzled out the song was largely forgotten, with snippets occasionally appearing in Doctor Who anthological products. It finally resurfaced in its entirety on the October 2000 album, Who is Doctor Who.


=== Doctorin' the Tardis (1988)Edit ===
"Doctorin' the Tardis" is an electronic novelty pop single by The Timelords ("Time Boy" and "Lord Rock", aliases of Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty, better known as The KLF). The song is predominantly a mash-up of the Doctor Who theme music, Gary Glitter's "Rock and Roll (Part Two)" with sections from "Blockbuster!" by Sweet and "Let's Get Together Tonite" by Steve Walsh. The single was panned by critics but became a commercial success, reaching number 1 in the UK Singles Chart and charting in the Top 10 in Australia and Norway. The song was also mashed-up with Green Day's Holiday for the album American Edit.


== DVDEdit ==


=== Earthshock, Part Five (2003)Edit ===
A spoof "episode" included in the Special Features section of the DVD release of Earthshock, rendered in claymation and computer animation. It shows Adric and the head of a Cyberman surviving the crash of the freighter into Cretaceous Earth, only for Adric to be eaten by a dinosaur. The Cyberman head commenting by saying "Excellent!".


=== Global Conspiracy (2003)Edit ===
This short reality-style documentary involves Mark Gatiss as the reporter for an investigation show, reporting on the weird happenings at Llanfairfach, the location of the incidents occurring in The Green Death. Mark talks to a variety of people, including the actors who played Professor Jones and Stevens, and the son of Stevens' assistant.


=== Oh Mummy (2004)Edit ===
A mockumentary looking about the villain Sutekh and what his career after Pyramids of Mars. Features the voice of Gabriel Woolf reprising his role as Sutekh and was featured with the 2004 DVD release of Pyramids of Mars.


=== Eye on ... Blatchford (2005)Edit ===
A mockumentary about Sardoth who's the Second-to-Last of the Jagaroth who is trying to live in a small community. Featured with the 2005 DVD release of City of Death.


== InternetEdit ==


=== Eddsworld (2010 - 2013)Edit ===
In the 2013 episode "Hide and Seek", Tom and Edd watch a show called Professor Why, in which the 'Professor' uses a magical wrench (sonic screwdriver), magical box (TARDIS), and magically changes his body (regeneration).


=== Epic Rap Battles of History (2010-)Edit ===
In the 2012 episode "Doc Brown vs. Doctor Who", Peter Shukoff and George Watsky appear as the Tenth Doctor and the Fourth Doctor, respectively, to engage in a rap battle with Doc Brown of the Back to the Future franchise. A Dalek also appears in the video.


=== Doctor Whore (2014)Edit ===
A pornographic parody of the show, "Doctor Whore XXX", was released in four installments by WoodRocket, a company that specializes in pornographic films.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
TV Ark page on Doctor Who spoof sketches
Official Dead Ringers site, including some streaming clips of Doctor Who parody