Sacred Seven (セイクリッドセブン, Seikuriddo Sebun), is a 2011 Japanese science fiction anime television series produced by Sunrise under the direction of Yoshimitsu Ohashi. Script supervisor is Shin Yoshida with mechanical designs by Ippei Gyōbu. The series began broadcasting in Japan starting July 3, 2011 on the Mainichi Broadcasting System and later will be rebroadcast by TV Kanagawa, TV Aichi, Tokyo MX, and Teletama. The anime was originally licensed by Bandai Entertainment for streaming, but they shut down in 2012. Following the 2012 closure of Bandai Entertainment, Sunrise announced at Otakon 2013, that Sentai Filmworks has rescued Sacred Seven, along with a handful of other former BEI titles.


== Plot ==
Alma Tandōji lives a lonely and solitary life in a certain port city within the Kantō region. One day, he is approached by Aiba Ruri who asks for his help, for the power of the Sacred Seven which resides within Alma. However, Alma turns her away. In the past, Alma had hurt people with that power. Since that moment, he had foresworn it. But when the peaceful city is attacked by a monster, Alma reluctantly decides to use the Sacred Seven. However, his powers go berserk and the situation becomes even more dire. At that moment, Ruri comes to his aid by inserting a sacred stone made using her jewel necklace and transform him to his true form.


== Characters ==
Alma Tandōji (丹童子 アルマ, Tandōji Aruma)
Voiced by: Takuma Terashima
The main protagonist of Sacred Seven. He was born with the power of Sacred Seven from his mother's exposure. A few years ago before the series, he lost control of his powers and harmed a lot of people. Hence, the reason he lives in solitude. Alma can only control his true powers if Ruri inserts a special Lightstone in him. He has access to all seven powers (hence the meaning Sacred Seven) it has also been stated that he has the highest level of Sacred Seven that even surpasses Kijima. Alma used to have a crystal that belonged to his mother that was supposed to suppress his powers, but it was thrown into the river by a bully which caused the incident. He has been looking for it ever since, hence developed a habit of looking for rocks. He became a member of the Geology Club at the same time Kagami and Ruri did. In episode 11, it was revealed that Kenmi caused the incident to test Alma's powers. Also the revelation that he met Ruri when he was little and realizes how important she is to him.
Ruri Aiba (藍羽ルリ, Aiba Ruri)
Voiced by: Megumi Nakajima
Another main character of Sacred Seven. She is the daughter of a billionaire noble family who were killed by a Darkstone. She created Aiba Foundation to combat against the Darkstones. She is a Lightstone that has the ability to turn a gem into a Lightstone and insert it into Alma to control his true powers. She became chairman of Alma's school (where she heavily renovated the school) and a member of the Geology Club to keep in contact with Alma. She has a twin sister named Aoi who also survived the Darkstone aftermath, but was crystallized. Her whole foundation is occupied with all female maids. She has feelings for Alma which is shown throughout the series.
Aoi Aiba (藍羽葵, Aiba Aoi)
Voiced by: Sayuri Yahagi
Ruri's sister, she had protected herself with a Crystal like stone when Kenmi killed her parents, since then she had been sleeping inside this crystal. It seems she has feelings for Kagami. In episode 12 she is shown her waking up and alive.
Makoto Kagami (鏡誠, Kagami Makoto)
Voiced by: Miyu Irino
Ruri's personal butler and field commander for the Aiba Foundation. At 18, he graduated from Harvard and is enrolled in Alma's school for his convenience. He became class president and a member of the Geology Club when he enrolled. He has his own personal mech to fight Darkstones called the Engagement Suit.
Wakana
Voiced by: Kanae Itō
A childhood friend of Alma after the incident. She is the only person that is not afraid of Alma despite the rumors. She's the head of the Geology Club. She has an obsession of finding good rocks, a trait that she passed on to Alma.
Naito Kijima
Voiced by: Nobuhiko Okamoto
He is the main rival and sub-antagonist of Alma. He is the same being as Alma except that he overuses his power, causing his condition deteriorate unless it is treated with a vaccine. He can alter objects around his surroundings and Darkstones into his weapons. He truly wants to be free even if he has to fight the Aiba Foundation for it. He has a bitter grudge against his former superior, Kenmi. He considers Alma as a higher class than himself. His companion, Fei, takes care of him.
Fei
Voiced by: Iori Nomizu
Another lightstone like Ruri who escaped with Kijima from Kenmi. He uses his blood to create vaccines for Kijima due to his overuse of powers. He had a brother name Zero who lost control of himself, until he and Kijima saved his sanity. However, his brother was killed by Kenmi shortly after, causing Fei to go into a berserk rage. According to the anime's official Twitter account, Fei was designated male at birth. The staff described him as a "currently-popular female-looking boy character."
Doctor Kenmi
Voiced by: Katsuyuki Konishi
The main antagonist of the series. He is a scientist for a private organization, Kenmi Group, that researches the capabilities of Sacred Seven. He was the one that experimented on Naito and was his former superior. He created a way to utilize the Sacred Seven power with an artificial crystal, however its powers are limited. After Alma and Ruri's confrontation with Naito, it is revealed that he performing illegal experiments on humans with the Seven's powers in secret. In episode 11, it was revealed that he caused the incident with Alma. With Zero's lightstone, he was able become stronger. His armor is called Cyclops.
Arakune (also known as SP)
Voiced by: Ai Takabe
Kenmi's personal secretary and possesses an artificial crystal to transform into an armor called Rabbit. She has a tendency to complain due to her lackadaisical nature and behaves in a manner akin to a child, however she is a very skilled operative. This is demonstrated aptly in her encounters with Naito, who she has fought to standstill on two separate occasions.
Hung Lau
Voiced by: Hirofumi Nojima
Fei's older brother and another Darkstone victim of Kenmi. He was the one responsible for the death of Ruri's parents and Kagami Sr. Kenmi altered body with armor and try to control his mind, which was unsuccessful at points, and turned him in to the Darkstone monster Zero, an armored fiery melting Balrog of ash. In episode 11, Fei cured him, only to be killed by Kenmi.
Other Darkstones
The Darkstones are creatures that base their bodies based on various mythological figures. In episode 10 it is revealed that they were formed from hearts sacrificed to the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl.
Perseus: Appears in episode 1. Powers include a hooked sword, stone lasers from the Medusa head for the left hand, super speed, and a torso mouth.
Medusa: Appears in episode 1. Powers include high jumping, a scorpion tail, head lasers, and snake tentacles.
Orochi: Appears in episode 2. Powers include wind manipulation, flight, and six dragon tentacles that launch cyclones and fire balls from the mouths.
Centipedes: Appear in episodes 2 and 3. Powers include flight, sharp teeth, burrowing, and self destruction.
Basilisk: Appears in episode 4. Powers include stone touch conversion, speed, and dividing.
Balor: Appears in episode 4. Powers include levitation, body spikes and self destruction.
Tsuchigumo: Appears in episode 5. Powers include summoning fast lice, earth manipulation, and eight jaws.
Zero: Appears in episodes 6, 7, and 11. Powers include speed, a high body temperature, flames from the head, and a whip tail.
Fujin: Appears in episode 9. Powers include speed, foot oriented martial arts, and high jumping.
Raijin: Appears in episode 9. Powers include a whip tongue, absorbing mouth, mouth flames and lasers, and a mouth in each foot.
Pyramid: Appears in episode 12. Powers include levitation, body lasers, and gravity manipulation.


== Media ==


=== CDs ===
The music for Sacred Seven is composed by Toshihiko Sahashi. An original studio album, Hand Made Soulmate (はんどめいど☆そうるめいと, Hando Meido Sourumeito), was released July 20, 2011. The album features eight songs all which are sung by Aiba Maid Group S7 (藍羽メイド隊Ｓ７, Aiba Meido-tai S7). The album was released on October 5, 2011, Flying Dog will release the soundtrack for the series titled Sacred Seven Original Soundtrack. The soundtrack includes the TV version of the opening and ending theme song, as well as insert songs and background music. A drama character album was released on September 7, 2011, titled Fragment of S7 Alma Tandouji × Ruri Aiba, which features songs sung by Alma Tandouji (Takuma Terashima) and Ruri Aiba (Megumi Nakajima) and a short audio drama. On October 5, another drama character album will be released featuring Makoto Kagami (Miyu Irino) and Aiba Maid Tai S7.


== Episode list ==


== Reception ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Sacred Seven (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia