Vincent R. Gray (born 1922, London) is a New Zealand-based chemist, and a founder of the New Zealand Climate Science Coalition.
Gray has a Ph.D. in physical chemistry from Cambridge University after studies on incendiary bomb fluids made from aluminium soaps. In New Zealand, he was the first Director of Building Research and later, Chief Chemist of the Coal Research Association. He has also published many articles and reports, seven in peer-reviewed journals. After retirement, he had four and a half years in China and when he returned became a critic of the claim that climate was harmed by human emissions of greenhouse gases.
He has commented on every publication of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, with 1,898 comments on the 2007 Report. He has published critical studies on all of the reports including a book "The Greenhouse Delusion: A Critique of 'Climate Change 2001'". He has published "Confessions of a Climate Sceptic"  He is sceptical of the anthropogenic global warming:
"The two main "scientific" claims of the IPCC are the claim that "the globe is warming" and "Increases in carbon dioxide emissions are responsible". Evidence for both of these claims is fatally flawed."
Gray has called for the IPCC to be abolished, claiming it is “fundamentally corrupt” due to his conclusion that for significant parts of the work of the IPCC, the data collection and scientific methods employed are unsound and that the IPCC resists all efforts to try to discuss or rectify these problems.
Gray was featured on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation program Counterpoint in a debate entitled "Nine Lies about Global Warming", and was interviewed in a featured story in the New Zealand Herald as a "prominent" global warming skeptic.
In 2002, Gray also published a book, The Greenhouse Delusion: A Critique of "Climate Change 2001". In it, Gray argues "that the quality and reliability of the IPCC's measurements are poor, the system of determining how much weight should be attributed to different influences on the earth's temperature is faulty, and the validity of evidence derived from computer modeling is questionable."


== Dispute over credentials ==
He has been an "Expert Reviewer for the IPCC" since 1990, although this consideration has been challenged and considered misleading since it does not require any expertise at all, but only that "he asked to see the draft report" and signed an agreement not to publicly comment on the draft report.


== See also ==
Climate change in New Zealand


== References ==


== External links ==
The New Zealand Climate Science Coalition
IPCC too blinkered and corrupt to save
Support for call for review of UN IPCC