Mid Day (stylised as mid-day) is a morning daily Indian compact newspaper. Editions in various languages are published in Mumbai and Pune.


== Establishment ==
It was established in Mumbai in 1979 as a family-owned newspaper by Khalid Ansari. Later, his son, Tariq Ansari led the paper, before it was sold to Jagran Prakashan in 2010. A Sunday edition, Sunday mid day, began in 1981.


== Ownership ==
The newspaper is owned by Mid Day Infomedia Limited, a subsidiary of Jagran Prakashan Limited, a publishing house listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange of India.


== Sections ==
Mid-day is a mainstream newspaper in compact format that carries the following sections from Monday to Saturday:
Local news: This is the stated key focus of the newspaper
National/International news
Lifestyle
Films
Sports
This apart it also carries others sections such as puzzles and games aiming to make work fun. The Sunday mid-day edition has the regular local and national/international news, the film pages (Hitlist) and an extended puzzles and games section. This apart it has a fairly comprehensive lifestyle section where articles and features are carried on:
Travel
Food
Automobile reviews
Health
Books
Interviews of prominent citizens
And other topics
The Newspaper underwent an overhaul, both of its print editions and the website, in early 2014, creating several new sections in the daily newspaper, the Sunday edition and the website 


== Relaunch of the newspaper and website in 2014 ==
Mid-day Infomedia publishes newspapers in three languages; English, Gujarati and an Urdu newspaper, The Inquilab. The Inquilab, the first paper of the group in Urdu, was born in the fervor of idealistic nationalism in 1938.
Originally, the newspaper published two editions in Mumbai: an early-morning and a noon edition. Since April 2009, only the morning editions have been published and the company has dropped printing a noon newspaper, citing positioning issues. During the overhaul and relaunch of the newspaper and the website in 2014, the paper's slogan was also changed to Made in Mumbai. The newspaper's relaunch was led editorially by Editor Sachin Kalbag with support from Sports editor Clayton Murzello, Hitlist editor Shubha Shetty Saha, features editor Fiona Fernandez and some others. The relaunch of Sunday Mid-Day and the website mid-day.com was editorially led by Kalbag along with erstwhile Sunday mid-day and online editor Dhiman Chattopadhyay. The Tabloid today has an estimated readership base of 5,00,000 for MiD Day (English) in Mumbai and broke in to the list of top 10 Indian newspapers by readership in the 2013 Indian Readership Survey list. The new look Mid-Day has received both positive and negative reactions 
The Parent company JPL (Jagran Prakashan) decided to close the Delhi and Bengaluru edition for the tabloid it acquired in May 2010. The reason for the pull out was stated as Escalating break even prices and rising competition, the management now wants to focus on strengthening the Mumbai and Pune additions of the tabloid.


== Marketing activity ==
Mid Day's Marketing campaigns are considered to be effective. The MiD DAY’s Bollywood Lunch Contest "MiD DAY’s Bollywood Lunch Contest" won at the IFRA award 2008 and at the Asia Multimedia Publishing Media Awards 2009. It is a contest driven promotion in which the winning person/reader and the entire office of the same gets to meet a star over a lunch date.


== Journalists jailed for reports on chief justice ==
On September 20, 2007, four journalists of Mid Day, including Resident Editor Vitusha Oberoi and City Editor MK Tayal, were sentenced to four months jail on contempt of court charges, because of a report they had filed on the ex-Chief Justice of India, Y. K. Sabharwal. Whether the charges in the report were true or not was not considered in arriving at the decision.
Many in the legal community feel that in the 2006 Delhi sealing drive, Justice Sabharwal may have had a conflict of interest since his sons own a firm with relations to the Delhi real estate. Former Solicitor General KK Sud had called this behaviour "the height of indiscretion."
The High Court, however, sentenced the journalists without considering the veracity of the reports, and this led to considerable controversy. Ex-law minister Shanti Bhushan stated that the Parliament had in 2006 amended the Contempt of Courts Act to say that "if the allegations against a judge were found to be true, then they would not be considered contemptuous." In view of this, the judgment, he said, may be "only aimed at terrifying the media and an attempt to curb truthfulness."


== Awards and other achievements ==
Asia Multimedia Publishing Media Awards 2009 
INMA AWARDS 2008 at California - USA INMA AWARDS 2009 - Miami - USA
Amsterdam IFRA AWARDS WOW Awards 2008
MiDDAY journalists won numerous prestigious awards in last four years -

 mid-day lensman Mr Atul Kamble has won the prestigious Wisden-MCC Cricket Photograph of the Year 2013 for his image of Sachin Tendulkar walking out to resume his innings against the West Indies in his farewell Test on November 15, 2013 at Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai.
 Mr Vinod Kumar Menon, city editor, midday won three consecutive Press Club Red Ink Awards, first journalist in the city to win three awards in a row.

Mr Menon, even won the Ramnath Goenka Award for excellence in Journalism. Mr Sharad Vyas ofMid Day bagged the award for excellence in Environment reporting,


== Senior staff ==
Jyotirmoy Dey, the Special Investigations Editor of Mid Day was shot dead on 11 June 2011 in Mumbai by unknown assailants. Since then Bhupen Patel has taken over as the special investigations editor 


== See also ==

List of newspapers in India


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Corporate website
Epaper