This is a list of characters from Disney/Pixar's Toy Story trilogy which consists of the animated films Toy Story (released 1995), Toy Story 2 (1999), and Toy Story 3 (2010).


== Primary characters ==


=== Woody ===
Voiced by:
Tom Hanks (1995–present)
Jim Hanks (most spinoff media)
Sheriff Woody Pride is a cowboy doll, and Andy's favorite toy. Appearing in all three Toy Story films, he usually acts as the leader of the gang. His rivalry with Buzz forms the basis of the plot of the first film. In Toy Story 2, he is stolen at a yard sale by a toy collector, causing the other toys to embark on a rescue mission. In Toy Story 3 he and the other toys are shipped to a daycare center.


=== Buzz Lightyear ===
Voiced by:
Tim Allen (1995–present)
Patrick Warburton (2000–2001) (Buzz Lightyear of Star Command)
Mike MacRae (video games)
Javier Fernandez-Peña (Spanish Buzz)
Buzz Lightyear is a "space ranger" action figure, and wears a space suit with various features such as retractable wings and transparent helmet, a laser "weapon," and various sound effects. In the films, he acts as Woody's second-in-command. In Toy Story, he begins the series believing he is a real space ranger (the other toys are aware that they are toys) and develops a rivalry with Woody, who resents him for getting more attention as the newcomer. During the film, he comes to realize that he is just a toy, and eventually becomes good friends with Woody. He is extremely loyal to his friends. During his time trapped at Sid's house, Hannah, Sid's sister, called Buzz Mrs. Nesbit. In Toy Story 2, Buzz goes to save Woody from Al with Potato Head, Hamm, Rex, and Slink (Slinky Dog) where he gets stuck in the Buzz Lightyear aisle in Al's Toy Barn by another Buzz and finds out for himself what he was really like. In Toy Story 3, a relationship begins to develop between Buzz and Jessie. He is particularly open with his affection when switched to "Spanish mode."


=== Jessie ===
Voiced by:
Joan Cusack (1999–present)
Mary Kay Bergman (yodeling voice) (Toy Story 2)
Kathryn Cressida (Disney Infinity)
Jessie is a cowgirl doll, and part of the Woody's Round Up gang. She first appeared in Toy Story 2 along with Bullseye and Stinky Pete. Initially, Jessie was hesitant to join Andy's friends. After she becomes part of the family, she is very happy (despite that Andy first calls her Bazooka Jane). In Toy Story 3, she was riding Bullseye when Woody fell off the train in Andy's opening sequence. She argued with Woody on their way to Sunnyside Daycare because of when the others think Andy threw them out. Later in the film, Jessie feels close with Buzz, even when Buzz got switched into Spanish. At the end, Jessie and Buzz danced to the Spanish version of "You've Got a Friend in Me." Jessie also makes a cameo appearance in Monsters, Inc. as one of the toys Boo gives Sulley. Jessie also appears in Pixar's production of Toy Story of Terror! as the main character that saves the other toys from the toy stealer and seller at the rest stop.


== Secondary characters ==


=== The Toys ===


==== Hamm ====
Voiced by:
John Ratzenberger (1995–present)
Andrew Stanton (2000)
Hamm is a wise cracking realist piggy bank with a cork in his belly in place of a stopper. He and Mr. Potato Head appear to be best friends, and are often seen playing games, such as Battleship (with Hamm always winning). Out of all the toys, he is shown to have the most knowledge of the outside, often being very familiar with various gadgets that are shown, likely as an homage to Ratzenberger's famous role of mail carrier and bar know-it-all Cliff Clavin on the sitcom Cheers.
In Toy Story, Hamm first appears early in the film, when Mr. Potato Head mixes up his own face and jokes that he's a "Picasso," but Hamm doesn't get it, causing Potato Head to call him an "uncultured swine." He interrupts Woody's staff meeting by yelling that there are "birthday guests at 3:00." He becomes fascinated with Buzz's features and makes fun of Woody, along with Potato Head. When Woody accidentally knocks Buzz off the window, Hamm is one of the many toys who believes that Woody did it intentionally, and is happy to see that Woody has disappeared. Later, when Hamm and Potato Head spot Woody at Sid's House with Buzz's broken arm, they believe he murdered Buzz, and leave him stranded there. When Woody and Buzz escape from Sid's House, and Woody pushes RC out of the moving truck, Hamm thinks he's trying to murder RC as well, and attacks him along with the others. Hamm feels guilty when it is discovered that Woody was telling the truth all along. At the end, Hamm cheers for Potato Head when Molly gets a Mrs. Potato Head for Christmas.
In Toy Story 2, Hamm is shown to hate the Al's Toy Barn chicken mascot the most of all the toys. When Woody is stolen, he and Mr. Potato Head set up a crime scene to present Woody's kidnapping to the other toys. After helping the toys find the Al's Toy Barn commercial on TV, Hamm goes with Buzz, Slinky, Rex, and Mr. Potato Head on a mission to rescue Woody. On the mission, it is revealed that Hamm is embarrassed to be seen without his cork in. In Al's Toy Barn, Hamm spots a "Bonus Belt" Buzz, thinking he is Andy's Buzz, though he comments on the new Buzz's odd behavior. Ultimately, Hamm and the other toys are able to rescue Woody and return home. In the morning, Hamm attempts to beat a "Buzz Lightyear: Attack on Zurg" video game that is previously tried by Rex and asks if he can play for him, but Rex doesn't want to play after defeating the real Zurg. Hamm and Rex watch Al's Toy Barn commercial on TV in which Al cries and seems to have been poor, which makes Hamm comment that crime doesn't pay.
In Toy Story 3, Hamm is "Evil Dr. Porkchop" in Andy's western play opening sequence, appearing in a giant pig-shaped spaceship to rescue One-Eyed Bart and thwart Woody and his gang. Later, when the toys are accidentally thrown out, Hamm is angry, believing that Andy threw them out on purpose. He escapes with the rest of the toys to Sunnyside Daycare, where he is initially happy to be played with, but dismayed as he realizes the toddlers are too rough. Later that night, Hamm and his friends realize that Woody was telling the truth about Andy. When the toys are imprisoned by Lotso and his henchmen, Hamm is shown to be able to play the harmonica. When Woody comes back to rescue the toys from Sunnyside he quotes "Return of the Astro-Nut" on Buzz being turned back to demo. He helps the toys escape by fighting with Rex to distract Buzz, who has been switched to demo mode by Lotso, so that Jessie can trap him under a plastic container. Hamm and Rex, being the heaviest of the toys, sit on top of the container to prevent Buzz from escaping. When Woody returns with Buzz's instruction manual to switch him back, Hamm reads the instructions while the others hold Buzz down. When they were about to die in the incinerator, Hamm grabbed the hands of Slinky and Rex. Later, after the toys are rescued from an incinerator-related death at the dump due to Lotso's selfishness, Hamm, along with Slinky, wants revenge, but Woody talks them both out of it. He is donated along with Andy's other toys to Bonnie, where he becomes best friends with Buttercup.
In a 2010 advertisement for the United States Postal Service promoting Toy Story 3, Hamm wears a postal worker's hat while promoting the Priority Mail service; Ratzenberger is best known for his role as mailman Cliff Clavin on the long-running sitcom Cheers. He also makes an appearance in the Toy Story 3 video game as the mayor in Toy Box mode.
Hamm also appears in the theatrical short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry and Partysaurus Rex.


==== Rex ====
Voiced by:
Wallace Shawn (1995–present)
Earl Boen (1999–2003)
Rex is an excitable large, green, plastic Tyrannosaurus rex. Rex suffers from anxiety, an inferiority complex and the concern that he is not scary enough. Rex's worst fear (after Sid) is that Andy will get another, scarier dinosaur. He is among the largest of Andy's toys, and is often depicted as the heaviest. He is voiced by Earl Boen in the Toy Story 2 video game. Although Rex is a toy dinosaur he dislikes confrontation and is sensitive in nature.
In Toy Story, he states that he was manufactured by a smaller company that was purchased in a leveraged buyout by Mattel (coincidentally, real-life Rex toys used to be made by Hasbro, but as of 2009 are indeed made by Mattel). He is first introduced when he moves Woody's doodle pad, then tries to scare Woody with his roar. When Buzz arrives, Rex is fascinated by his cool features. Later, when Woody knocks Buzz out the window, he reluctantly sides against Woody out of pressure from the other toys. He is, however, a great deal less antagonistic than most of the other toys. He later feels guilty when everyone discovers Woody was telling the truth all along. He gains confidence at the end, saying he could play as the dominant predator if Andy gets a leaf eater.
The beginning of Toy Story 2, he is shown playing the "Buzz Lightyear: Attack on Zurg" video game, which he loses, much to his frustration. He is responsible for the toys seeing the commercial for Al's Toy Barn commercial when he accidentally clicks the remote control. Inside Al's Toy Barn, he excitedly finds a "Buzz Lightyear" video game strategy guide, which he takes with him. He loses the guide later, but is still able to give Buzz 2 tips from the guide on defeating Zurg. In a parody of Jurassic Park, he chases a car driven by the toys in Al's Toy Barn, in which Mr. Potato Head spots his reflection in the rear view mirror. It is Rex's tail sticking out of Al's bag that later causes the real Buzz to go after them. When the other Toys, led by Buzz 2 reach Al's Apartment, the toys use Rex as a battering ram to break in against the unlocked grate. When Zurg is about to finish off Buzz 2, he turns away, not bearing to look anymore, but his tail knocks Zurg down the elevator shaft, making him feel overjoyed about finally defeating Zurg for real.
In Toy Story 3, he is Woody's "Dinosaur who Eats Force Field Dogs" in Andy's opening western play sequence, where he frightens One-Eyed Bart and his gang with a terrifying roar, but is then overpowered by a flood of monkeys. He is seen to be especially sad about Andy's lack of attention to the toys, expressing joy when Andy touches him for only a few moments. When the toys are initially left for the garbage pickup, he is ultimately responsible for saving them when they use his tail to rip a hole in the garbage bag. He is initially happy to be at Sunnyside, and is visibly sad when Woody leaves, but becomes dismayed after a rough playtime with the toddlers, commenting "Andy never played with us like that!" He is imprisoned along with Andy's other toys by Lotso and his gang. Later, at the garbage dump, Rex is the last to escape the shredder, only barely escaping when he grabs onto a broken fan. He discovers a source of light thinking that it's daylight, but Woody convinces him that it's not; it's the light of the flame from the incinerator. When the toys are finally given to Bonnie, Rex becomes close friends with Trixie the Triceratops.
In an outtake of Toy Story 2, when used as a battering ram, Rex hurt his head when banged against the locked grate. Rex makes an appearance in an outtake of Monsters, Inc. where he waits at the crosswalk with Mike and Sulley in a scene reminiscent of Jurassic Park. Rex is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer video game. In the movie WALL-E, Rex is seen in the background inside the truck.
Rex reappears in the theatrical short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, Partysaurus Rex and in the TV specials Toy Story of Terror!, and Toy Story That Time Forgot.


==== Slinky Dog ====

Voiced by:
Jim Varney – (1995–2000)
Darryl Kurylo – (Toy Story Racer)
Blake Clark – (2010–present)
Slinky Dog (usually called just Slinky or sometimes Slink) is a toy dachshund with a metal Slinky for a body, who speaks with a southern accent. Slinky's head, feet, and tail are plastic and he is missing his pull string. Slinky also has a green collar. Slinky Dog is based on Slinky, a pull toy by James Industries, which was popular in the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s. With the permission of James Industries, Slinky Dog was partially redesigned for the film by Pixar artist Bud Luckey to make him more appealing as an animated character.
In Toy Story, he likes playing checkers with Woody, usually choosing the red side. Slinky is shown to be the most loyal to Woody and stands up for him when Potato Head complains. Slinky is fascinated by Buzz, along with the rest of the toys, but does not make fun of Woody when Buzz arrives like the others do. When Woody knocks Buzz out of the window, Slinky is one of the few toys who believes it was an accident. Later, when Andy notices Woody is missing, he and Bo Peep are worried about him, in contrast to the others, who are glad he's gone. Later, he attempts to help when Woody throws a chain of Christmas lights from Sid's house to Andy's, but Potato Head stops him. Even Slinky appears to give up on Woody when he pretends Buzz is with him but accidentally reveals his broken arm. He is stretched almost to the point of breaking when helping rescue Woody and Buzz on the moving truck, but is fixed by the end of the film.
At the beginning of Toy Story 2, Slinky is the one who finds Woody's hat, and joins Buzz, Hamm, Mr. Potato Head and Rex on a mission to rescue Woody from Al McWhiggin. His springy coil is used as a bungee cord when the toys jump from the roof of Andy's house. When the toys break into Al's apartment, Slinky uses his spring to hold Jessie and Bullseye back by coiling them up so the toys can safely rescue Woody. After Al packs up Woody and his Roundup gang and heads for the airport, Slinky, stretching down from the elevator ceiling by Buzz, Hamm and Potato Head, reaches for the case that contains Woody, and almost manages to save him, but is thwarted by the Prospector. He goes to the airport with the others and is able to rescue Woody, and returns home with the rest of the group. In an outtake, he is seen petting his own hind section and talking to it.
In Toy Story 3, Slinky has a smaller role compared to the previous two films. He is the only original character that had to be re-cast (due to Jim Varney's death), and was replaced by Blake Clark in this film. Slinky is One-Eyed Bart's "Attack Dog with a Built-in Force Field" and protects the bad guys with his shield in Andy's western play sequence. At Sunnyside Daycare, Slinky has been tangled up by the young children. Later that night, Slinky reveals that Woody was telling them the truth about Andy's intention to store the toys into the attic. Slinky and his friends are imprisoned by Lotso's gang. He is shown to be the happiest toy to see Woody return, and assists him in subduing the Monkey toy who monitors the security cameras. When the toys reach the dumpster, Slinky stretches himself to create a bridge for the toys to climb across to safety, although they are stopped by Lotso. When the toys end up at the dump, Slinky is the first to be taken up by a magnetic ceiling due to the metallic section of his body. When Lotso betrays the toys and leaves them to be burned up in the incinerator, Slinky is the first to follow Buzz in joining hands in acceptance of their fate. After the toys are rescued by the Squeeze Toy Aliens, he and Hamm are the most vocal about wanting to get revenge on Lotso for leaving them to die before Woody convinces them Lotso isn't worth it. He is eventually donated to Bonnie along with the rest of the toys.
His catchphrase, said in all three movies, is "Golly bob-howdy!"
Slinky reappears in the short film Hawaiian Vacation, in which he acts as a hotel porter as part of Ken and Barbie's Hawaiian adventures. He also appears in Small Fry and Partysaurus Rex. He does not speak in Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins, and appears along with Jessie in one scene as a silent cameo, and it could also imply due to the death of his original voice actor Jim Varney, who died from lung cancer on February 10, 2000.


==== Mr. Potato Head ====
Voiced by:
Don Rickles (1995–present)
Mr. Potato Head (often referred to as simply Potato Head) is a doll based on the real-life toy by Playskool. He is an outspoken and sarcastic potato-shaped toy: his patented design allows him to separate his detachable parts from his body by removing them from the holes on his body. He also has a compartment on his lower back to store extra appendages. He is capable of retaining control over his parts even if they are several meters away from his main body. For example, he can still see if one or both of his detachable eyes are removed, as well as being able to move his hands if they are detached. The same thing applies to his "Mrs." counterpart, as she was able to see Andy in his room through her eye left behind. While this attribute is mostly used for comedic effect (i.e. as a running gag, he often finds himself being split or falling apart due to outside forces), it does have its uses, particularly in the second and third films.
In Toy Story, he becomes fascinated with all the features of the Buzz Lightyear action figure that Andy has received for his birthday, Potato Head ridicules Woody for not having a laser like Buzz as well as Woody's pullstring. After Buzz is knocked out of the window, Potato Head blames Woody for kicking him out, thinking that Woody might do the same to him if Andy plays with him more often, and turns the other toys against Woody and leads a mutiny with them. When Woody reveals himself at Sid's House later, Mr. Potato Head convinces the others to refuse to help him, still assuming that Woody attacked Buzz. They are packed up, but Mr. Potato Head is still unhappy because he is stuck with Rex as a moving buddy and put in a moving truck later but Woody catches up with them and however when Woody tosses RC onto the street to rescue Buzz, Potato Head, still distrusting Woody, orders the other toys to mutiny again, and "toss him overboard", however, when Bo Peep reveals that "Woody was telling the truth," the toys realize their mistake. He decides to reform himself as an apology to Woody by holding Slinky's tail to help Woody and Buzz back at the truck but gets hit after Slinky's attempt fails. When Woody tosses RC in the truck, Potato Head gets hit. At the end of the film, he is surprised to hear Molly receiving Mrs. Potato Head for her Christmas present and promptly decides to shave by removing his moustache.
In Toy Story 2, after Al McWhiggin steals Woody, he goes with Buzz, Hamm, Rex, and Slinky to rescue Woody. Later, when they are going to leave, Mrs. Potato Head packs some extra pair of shoes and angry eyes on his back compartment. When the toys cross the street to Al's Toy Barn, they cause a semi to jackknife, and the chains restraining a large pipe on the semi break, freeing the pipe, which rolls down the street, during which Mr. Potato Head gets one of his feet stuck in a chewing gum and has to pull his foot off the gum before the pipe can crush him. After the toys break into Al's room using Rex as a battering ram, Potato Head attempts to frighten Jessie by reaching into his back compartment for his angry eyes, but attaches his spare pair of shoes by mistake. When the toys leave the apartment after Al leaves with Woody, Potato Head throws his hat like a frisbee to jam the closing doors, letting the toys pass through. Outside, he is the first to spot an idling Pizza Planet delivery truck nearby. While the toys chase Al in the truck, Potato Head saves three alien toys from flying out the window. In the airport, when he sees the luggage area, he gasps and his angry eyes and pair of shoes come out after his compartment opens. He feels annoyed when the aliens repeatedly express their eternal gratefulness towards him, but after the toys return home, he reluctantly gives in when his wife wants to adopt the aliens, much to his dismay. In an outtake, he is seen taking a dislike with the Barrel of Monkeys, saying he is "drawing the line at monkeys" and wants to call his agent.
In Toy Story 3, Potato Head is resentful of the aliens, who still worship him for saving their lives. Potato Head is sad that Andy doesn't play with them anymore, and complains all that to Woody. He is frustrated that Andy "threw them away", when he was actually going to put them in the attic. Again, Potato Head is the toy most doubtful of Woody when he and the other toys are almost thrown away by accident. Potato Head is excited to get played with in Sunnyside. After a rough playtime with the toddlers, he and Mrs. Potato Head's parts are scattered on the floor, and he gets his parts stuck up a kid's mouth and nose. Later that night, his wife Mrs. Potato Head through the other eye left in Andy's bedroom, spots that Andy is looking for his toys, making Mr. Potato Head and the other toys shocked. When Lotso's dark attitude is revealed, he tries to defend his friends from Lotso, but Big Baby throws him into the "The Box" on Lotso's orders. When Jessie told Woody she was wrong to leave Andy, Potato Head agrees saying that she was wrong. The toys hatch an escape plan which Potato Head initiates by arguing with and distracting the captors, and he is thrown in the box once again. Only his smaller parts are able to escape, through a small hole. He reassembles onto a floppy tortilla, checks if Lotso is sleeping and then gives the signal. Pecked at by a pigeon, the tortilla falls apart, and Potato Head rejoins the other toys using a cucumber for a body. Bullseye returns his original plastic body to him. The toys manage to escape Sunnyside, and he and the other toys jump onto a garbage truck. Eventually, they end up in a landfill, facing death in the incinerator. However, Potato Head and the toys are saved by his alien children, who he now accepts and declares himself to be eternally grateful, just as the aliens had told him when they met. They eventually return to Andy's home and get washed. Mr. Potato Head then says his farewell to Woody before Andy comes into the room. Potato Head is donated to Bonnie at the end of the film.
Potato Head reappears in the theatrical short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, and Partysaurus Rex, and appears in Toy Story of Terror! and Toy Story That Time Forgot.
He is seen as an Interactive Audio-Animatronic at Toy Story Midway Mania!. It is stated on the Toy Story website that Mr. Potato Head was Andy's second toy.


==== Mrs. Potato Head ====
Voiced by:
Estelle Harris (1999–present)
Mrs. Potato Head is Mr. Potato Head's wife and female counterpart. Unlike her husband, Mrs. Potato Head is sweet and not hot-headed or impatient. Although mentioned as one of Molly's Christmas presents near the end of the first movie, she isn't seen until Toy Story 2.
In Toy Story 2, her husband has found her lost earring. Before her husband leaves with Buzz and his troops, she stores his "extra pair of shoes and angry eyes" into his back compartment. (The outtakes show Mrs. Potato Head overloading her husband's back compartment with several unnecessary appendages: cheese puffs, a key, a golf ball, a plastic steak, a rubber ducky, a yo-yo, a bouncy ball, wind-up novelty teeth, two yellow crayons, blue Play-Doh, a dime, and monkey chow) She also warns the toys by saying "Don't talk to any toy you don't know!" She isn't seen until the end of the film. She becomes an adoptive mother of the three Squeeze Toy Aliens that Andy's toys had found in the Pizza Planet truck, as they won't leave because Mr. Potato Head saved their lives. She is then happily watching Wheezy sing his version of "You've Got a Friend in Me" with her husband.
In Toy Story 3, she has a more central role. She is "One-Eyed Betty", One-Eyed Bart's wife in the opening sequence. She uses her ninja skills and her nunchuk to herd Woody to the back, and eventually off the train. After One-Eyed Bart and Betty rob tons of gold, they are transported to Dr. Porkchop's aircraft. At the present time when Andy's toys all cram themselves in the toy box, Mrs. Potato Head loses one of her eyes. She is one of the toys who believe Andy threw them out on purpose, which he didn't. They are later donated to Sunnyside Daycare. She and her husband experience a rough playtime with the toddlers at the Caterpillar Room. When the toys hear something from the halls, Mrs. Potato Head uses her eye and looks under the door. She at first just sees the dark hall, but then she sees Andy looking for the toys in his room, due to the eye she left behind in Andy's house. She tells the toys it truly was an accident that they were thrown away. When Lotso is revealed to be evil, Mrs. Potato Head complains about her chewed up pocketbook and yells at him when he calls her "Sweet Potato," along with telling him she needs more respect and having over 30 accessories. But Lotso takes off her mouth. Mrs. Potato Head is surprised to see her husband all covered in sand from spending the night in the "Box". The toys plan an escape after they reunite with Woody. Mrs. Potato Head uses the key to open the door. Later, she comments that Mr. Potato Head had lost weight and looks tall when he attached his body parts to a cucumber. The toys manage to escape, but they are taken to the dump. Mrs. Potato Head screams when her alien children get run over. She alerts Buzz and Jessie when a TV is about to fall on them. She is saved from death in an incinerator by her adoptive children, and much to her delight, her husband now accepts them. She recovers her missing eye before she and the toys are donated to Bonnie. Even though she was Molly's Christmas gift in the first film, the second and third films imply that she is one of Andy's toys.
Mrs. Potato Head reappears in the theatrical short film Hawaiian Vacation and acts as a tour guide for Ken and Barbie in their Hawaiian adventures. She also reappears in Small Fry and Partysaurus Rex.


==== Bullseye ====
Bullseye the horse is the first toy with which Woody interacted in Al's penthouse. He was extremely happy to finally see Woody over a long time in storage. When Woody found a shelf full of collectibles of him and his roundup gang, Bullseye jumped to the record player while attempting to catch a toy snake fired from a toy boot by Woody. When Woody loses an arm, he attempts to get his arm back from Al, who is sleeping with a fallen bowl of scattered cheese puffs everywhere. Bullseye joins in and tries to help him. Woody told him to go and reminded him he's trying to get him to storage, but Bullseye licks him and wants to help, so Woody allowed him to. But he licked Al's cheesy fingers, but stopped when Woody told him to stop. Bullseye is shown to loathe fights as he hides in a can when Jessie jumps on Woody. He is also upset at Woody's intention to abandon the Roundup gang to return to Andy. Bullseye doesn't want Woody to leave and sadly looked at him when he stared at the vent, which is the way out. But Bullseye grins when Woody decides to stay with the gang. Later when Woody was doing an introduction, he called Bullseye to ride like the wind, but his saddle fell, making him move out, embarrassed. When Buzz and the toys find Woody, Slinky tangled Jessie and Bullseye so they could grab Woody and run. But Woody refused to join them, but later did. When Woody ultimately decides to return to Andy's room, it is Bullseye's loyalty that causes Woody to try to get the other toys to join him. At the airport, after Bullseye escapes from Al's case, Woody and Buzz Lightyear mount Bullseye and gallop across the airfield to rescue Jessie from being sent to Japan. Although Woody gets separated from Buzz, Buzz commandeers Bullseye to follow Woody, as they are seen galloping next to the wheels of the plane Woody and Jessie are on as it heads down the runway. The mission finally ends when Woody and Jessie swing down from the plane and land on Bullseye back right behind Buzz, seconds before the plane takes off. After the toys return home, both Bullseye and Jessie come along as part of Andy's toys. Bullseye has every letter of Andy's name printed on the sole of each of his hooves. Bullseye happily watches Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me."
Bullseye returns in Toy Story 3 as one of the remaining toys in Andy's room. He is still Woody's horse in the opening sequence and saves him when he falls off the train by One-Eyed Betty. Bullseye's fast speed helps Woody catch the train and rescue the orphans. Bullseye is really sad when Andy wouldn't play with them anymore. After Andy's mom thought the bag that the toys were in was trash, Bullseye and the toys manage to safely hide in a recycling bin. The toys are donated to Sunnyside Daycare. At Sunnyside, he proves his loyalty to Woody when he makes clear he wants to stay with him. He only stays when Woody tells him to since Woody doesn't want him to be alone in the attic. Bullseye is roughly tumbled over by a screaming toddler with a rolling wheel toy. After the toddler play session, Bullseye is covered with paint and has a blue sticker in his snout, which is removed by Jessie. When Lotso is revealed to be evil, he locks the toys up and shows them Woody's hat, making Bullseye miss Woody and sad he's gone. Bullseye is extremely happy when Woody comes back to Sunnyside and gives him back his hat. The toys then plan an escape. Bullseye helps by going through the playground, carrying the aliens on his back. He goes with Woody and is almost caught by Big Baby when Bullseye jumps and accidentally makes an alien fall and squeak. But they hide inside a pail safely. The toys then go to the garbage dump, and Bullseye is the most desperate to escape from the incinerator. They are rescued by the three aliens. At the end, Bullseye is donated to Bonnie, along with the rest of the toys. In Bonnie's room Bullseye changes the channel of a radio to a Spanish channel causing Buzz and Jessie to dance to the Spanish version of "You've got a friend in me."
Bullseye acts like a dog in many ways. Unlike most of the other toys, Bullseye cannot communicate in clear speech but sounds like an actual horse and uses body language to speak. According to a character interview that used to be on the Toy Story website, Bullseye communicated with Jessie while in storage by tapping his hooves to yes or no questions.
Bullseye reappears in the short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, and Partysaurus Rex.


==== Squeeze Toy Aliens / Little Green Men ====
Voiced by:
Jeff Pidgeon and Debi Derryberry — Toy Story, Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3
Patrick Warburton — Buzz Lightyear of Star Command
The Squeeze Toy Aliens, also known as Little Green Men (or "LGMs") in Buzz Lightyear of Star Command television series, are a series of green, three-eyed squeaky toy aliens. They appear in all three films, and some were among Andy's toys after the events of Toy Story 2. Though it's not clear whether they are male or female at first glance, they are identified in the third film by Mr. Potato Head as "[his] boys," meaning all three are male.
In Toy Story, Buzz finds a giant claw game at Pizza Planet, thinking that it is the spaceship Woody was talking to him about, along with the "Ready To Launch" sign. When Buzz jumps in the spaceship, he sees hundreds of squeeze toy aliens. When Buzz asks who is in charge, the Little Green Men say "the claw", which belongs in the machine; the Little Green Men say that the claw will "decide who will go and who will stay". Then Woody climbs in, but when he spots Sid, he hides tries to grab Buzz. As he does, Sid gets a Little Green Man and then realizes that there is a Buzz Lightyear in the machine, as Buzz has just been under the Little Green Man who he just picked. Woody pulls Buzz's legs so he does not get taken by Sid, but the Little Green Men bring Buzz, with Woody hanging on Buzz's feet, to get chosen, saying they must not fight the claw. As a result, Woody, Buzz, and the Little Green Man get taken to Sid's house. Sid gives the Little Green Man to his dog, Scud, as he grabs and chews it apart, making Woody and Buzz watch in horror. Near the end of the movie, the Little Green Man who was previously torn apart by Scud is seen to be intact, and it helps Woody try to scare Sid by getting out of Scud's food bowl and walking like a zombie toward Sid.
In Toy Story 2, a trio of them are hanging above the dashboard in the Pizza Planet truck. Buzz groans when he sees them, remembering them from the claw game. They tell Mr. Potato Head to "use the wand of power" (the truck's gear lever), which they mistook for the control lever of the giant claw game. They nearly fall out of the window, due to the sharp turns from Buzz trying to catch Al in his car. Fortunately, Mr. Potato Head saves them. The Little Green Men are thankful and hand him his ear. Throughout the rest of the movie they frequently say "You have saved our lives, we are eternally grateful," much to Potato Head's dismay. The Little Green Men join the quest to save Woody and chase after the luggage with Rex, Hamm, and Potato Head, only to find cameras. Back home, the trio, along with Bullseye and Jessie, end up becoming some of Andy's toys. They say their gratefulness to Mr. Potato Head, and Mrs. Potato Head is so happy that he saved their lives, so she suggests that they adopt them, with the Little Green Men calling Potato Head "daddy". They then watched Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me." In an outtake of the film (when the camera loses the focus), it was revealed that one of the Little Green Men also appeared in Toy Story as the one grabbing Woody's ankle "in the letterbox copy", and he is offered the role of a villain in a toothpaste commercial.
They reappear in Toy Story 3 as the "henchmen" under One-Eyed Bart and One-Eyed Betty, and serve as the getaway drivers during the western opening sequence and drive Barbie's corvette. The car is destroyed by Buzz's laser and they are transported to Dr. Porkchop's aircraft. In the present time, the same trio continues to express their gratefulness to Mr. Potato Head. When Andy's mother mistakes the trash bag containing them as trash, she puts the toys on the curb, but they manage to escape the garbage bag. They are donated to Sunnyside along with the rest of Andy's toys. In Sunnyside, the Little Green Men find a toy crane, which reminds them of the claw game in Pizza Planet. The Little Green Men get sat on and bounced on during a rough playtime with the toddlers. The toys plan to escape Sunnyside. The Little Green Men have to go through the playground with Woody and ride on Bullseye. They almost get caught by Big Baby because one of the Little Green Men falls off Bullseye and squeaks, but manage to hide inside a pail. Later when Andy's toys escape, one of the Little Green Men's feet gets stuck in the lid of the bin at the bottom of the chute, possibly after being pulled by Lotso, who had been thrown in the bin by Big Baby. Woody goes in to help, but after he helps the Little Green Man, Lotso grabs Woody's feet and pulls him into the bin just as the refuse truck arrives. The toys are collected by the truck and subsequently sent to landfill. The Little Green Men are separated from the others by a bulldozer when they wander off, having spotted a crane. Woody and Mrs. Potato Head yell and try to warn them, but they are presumed to be dead after being plowed by the bulldozer. In the end, however, they are revealed to have avoided the conveyor belt and later rescue everyone from an incinerator with a giant claw crane for which the Potato Heads finally acknowledges them as his children, responding their repetitive line, "You have saved our lives and we are eternally grateful." The trio are later delivered to Bonnie along with the rest of Andy's toys.
The Aliens reappear in the theatrical short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry and Partysaurus Rex.


==== Barbie ====
Voiced by:
Jodi Benson — Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3
In Toy Story 2, the toys discover Barbie dolls in an aisle while searching for Woody. Hamm asks them if they know where Al is. Tour Guide Barbie volunteered to help and got in their car and gave them a tour around Al's Toy Barn. The toys crash into a bouncy ball machine when Rex showed his strategy guide in front of everyone, making Tour Guide Barbie not see where she was going. Rex chased after the car when he fell off, making Tour Guide Barbie tell everyone to remain seated, along with reciting it in Spanish. During the end credits she is a cinema usherette and is seen giving out instructions to the audience. After a while she asks if everyone has gone and promptly stops smiling and complains that it hurts her face. She then leaves for her break.
In Toy Story 3, a Barbie appears to be one of the toys that Andy's sister, Molly, owns. She has a ponytail decorated in a pink scarf with a matching belt around her waist and the same color of high heel shoes on her feet and wears a turquoise sleeveless unitard with striped legwarmers. In Sunnyside, she falls in love with Ken. Ken begs her to join him in the Butterfly room. When Ken goes to the gambling den with his henchmen, he tells Barbie to wait in the dream house. After Ken and the others reset Buzz, Barbie breaks up with him. They later try to escape Sunnyside. Barbie tricks Ken into his house, where she asks him on where to find a manual to Buzz Lightyear. Ken tells Barbie where the manual is. She assists Andy's friends in resetting Buzz back to his original state. When they are stopped by Lotso and his gang from escaping Sunnyside, Barbie tells Lotso, about how it is better to have them be treated fairly than be ruled by a dictator. Her statement makes Ken come to her help, which makes Barbie fall back in love with him and hugs him shortly after Lotso forcefully throws Ken to Andy's friends. In the end credits of the film, they are once again in a relationship and change Sunnyside, becoming its co-leaders, after Lotso is defeated. At a party at Sunnyside, Barbie is seen coming down the toy elevator on Ken's Dream House with a gold dress.
Barbie appears with Ken in Hawaiian Vacation.


==== Sarge and the Bucket O' Soldiers ====
Voiced by:
R. Lee Ermey (Sarge)
Sarge (also known as Army Sarge and Sergeant) is the gung-ho commander of an army of plastic toy soldiers from Bucket O Soldiers and loosely based on his voice actor's role as Gunnery Sergeant Hartman in the 1987 film Full Metal Jacket.
In Toy Story, he and the Bucket O' Soldiers are set in particular positions. They are highly disciplined with a "Leave no man behind" policy and are masters of reconnaissance. Woody describes them as "professionals." The soldiers venture out of Andy's room and hide in an indoor plant to report Andy's birthday presents to the toys and one of his comrades was injured after Mrs. Davis accidentally steps on one of them. They announced the first few presents, but didn't get to tell Andy got a Buzz Lightyear action figure. Sarge and his soldiers thought Woody was a murderer when he knocked Buzz off the window, so they "frag" him and each one of them attack Woody, along with the other toys. In the moving van, the soldiers attack Woody when he pushed RC off the van, making Sarge and the toys think he's murdering him now. However, Sarge sees that Woody knocking Buzz out the window was an accident, attempts to helps him on the van with the other toys, and is proud to work under Woody once again, as shown at the end of the film when they hide in a Christmas tree and Christmas lights to report to the toys what Andy and Molly are getting for Christmas.
In Toy Story 2, the role of Sarge is very minor. He first orders the soldiers to keep looking for Woody's hat in the toy box. When Buster was about to come to the room, Sarge and his army held back the door (with help from Rocky) to prevent Buster's entry, but Buster bursts open the door, causing the soldiers to go flying everywhere. When Woody alerts the toys about the yard sale occurring outside the house, he signals Sarge for an "emergency roll call" and Sarge orders the toys to line up in a single-file line. At the end, Sarge and his soldiers watch Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me."
In Toy Story 3, several years after Toy Story 2, only Sarge and two paratroopers are seen. Woody ordered Sarge and his men to retrieve Andy's cellphone. That plan, however failed and Knowing that Andy is going to get out the garbage bag, Sarge and his last two men leave Andy's room to find a better life. Buzz believes they are going AWOL, but Sarge claims that their mission is complete, and that when trash bags come out, the Army men are always the first to be thrown away (it's likely that the rest of the soldiers had either left prior to that day, or were sold in a yard sale). They appear again at the end of the film where they land on Sunnyside, and possibly recognizing Barbie, living a happy life under Barbie and Ken's leadership.


==== Bo Peep ====
Voiced by:
Annie Potts (1995–1999, 2018)
Rebecca Wink (Toy Story Racer)
Bo Peep is a porcelain figurine attached to Molly's bedside lamp inspired by the heroine of the famed nursery rhyme; a beautiful, sweet-natured shepherdess accompanied by a single figure merged to resemble three sheep, who serves as Woody's romantic interest of the films. In spite of her status as one of Molly's toys, like Mrs. Potato Head she may fall under the category of Andy's toy. In Andy's games of imaginative play she is used as the damsel-in-distress of the stories, and she is depicted as gentle, ladylike, and kindhearted. In the first film, after Woody's exclusion from the group after Buzz Lightyear started to attract more attention, she remained loyal to him rather than taunting him because of Buzz's rise in popularity. She continued to show her attraction to Woody into the sequel, flirting with him, and she plays something of a minor role on occasion. However, she did not return in Toy Story 3, except in flashback footage, as she had apparently been sold over the years like a few of the other characters, to Woody's sadness. The particular reason for her disappearance was never disclosed officially, though Woody shows grief over her loss. In August 2015, however, it was revealed that Bo Peep will have a major role in Toy Story 4. The fourth film will focus on her relationship with Woody along with Woody and Buzz trying to find her and bring her back.


==== RC ====
RC (often known as RC car) is Andy's remote controlled buggy. He has a green body with blue splash decals on the front. RC speaks in "revving" sounds (he can't talk, but Potato Head and the toys can understand his motor sounds). RC stands for "Radio Controlled." RC is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer Video Game.
In Toy Story, RC was fascinated with Buzz's features. When Woody becomes really jealous, he calls out to Buzz that there is a toy (a magic 8 ball) trapped underneath the desk. Woody sneaks over to RC, starts him up, and tried to hit Buzz but misses. However, RC hits a board instead, causing thumbtacks on the board to fall and a globe to roll. Buzz falls out a window when the globe hits a red lamp and swings around and hits him. RC says to the other toys that Woody accidentally knocking Buzz out the window. RC then turns on Woody and thinks that he murdered Buzz. When Woody went to the moving van, he got RC out of the box and pushes him into the street and controlled him to rescue Buzz during the moving scene at the end of the film. After the toys mistakenly think that Woody is trying to get rid of RC, they toss Woody out of the moving truck into the street. RC finds Buzz hiding under the car in the streets and is thrilled to see him. Buzz controlled RC to catch Woody. Woody switched the remote to turbo mode to catch up with the truck, but RC's batteries deplete, causing him to slow down and finally stop. When Woody lights the rocket taped onto Buzz's back, Woody and Buzz hold onto RC as they rocket toward the truck, but the force of the rocket lifts Woody up from RC. Nevertheless, Woody manages to toss RC back into the truck (knocking Mr. Potato Head apart in the process) before he and Buzz go skyrocketing into the air.
In Toy Story 2, RC had a very minor role. He was used when Andy played with his toys. With Buzz riding him, he crashed into Evil Dr. Porkchop and knocked him down. He isn't seen again until the end of the film, when he watched Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me."
RC didn't appear in Toy Story 3, since he was most likely sold in a yard sale along with Bo Peep and some other unfortunate toys and appears only in archive footage.


==== Wheezy ====
Voiced by:
Joe Ranft (1999)
Robert Goulet (singing voice)
Phil LaMarr (Toy Story 3: The Video Game)
Wheezy (also known as Wheezy the Penguin) is a squeeze toy penguin with a red bow tie.
In Toy Story 2, Wheezy is introduced when Woody finds him on the shelf. Wheezy was one of Andy's favourite toys until one day his squeaker broke. Andy's mum then put him on the shelf, intending to fix his broken squeaker later, but she forgot about him. He is about to be sold at the yard sale, and in saving him, Woody ends up falling so that he is stuck at the yard sale himself and subsequently stolen by Al. At the end of the film, he gets a new "squeaker" and sings "You've Got a Friend in Me," the ending theme of the movie. During the outtakes, he describes himself as "not a good catcher" as he fails to catch Mike's microphone thus hurting himself several times.
Wheezy does not directly appear in Toy Story 3 as he was sold in a yard sale after Toy Story 2, as mentioned by Woody, but he does appear in footage of Andy as a boy. Wheezy appears in the Toy Story 3 video game, where he is voiced by Phil LaMarr in toy box mode along with Bo Peep.


==== Etch ====
Etch is an Etch A Sketch magic screen by Ohio Art Company. Etch can draw quickly and accurately. Such sketches include guns, portraits of Buzz, Woody and Al, Hangman nooses, and even semi-complicated maps. This is his form of communication as he is unable to talk.
In Toy Story, Woody compliments Etch's art by saying that he has the fastest knobs in the west. He was also seen in the background many times, such as during the staff meetings and during Andy's birthday and Christmas gift opening scenes. He became fascinated with Buzz during the middle of the film when he sketched a portrait of him. Angered by this, Woody erased it.
In Toy Story 2, Etch was seen helping Hamm, Mr. Potato Head and the gang to identify Woody's kidnapper, Al. Later on, when the toys were surfing channels to find the location on how to find Al's Toy Barn, Etch is seen in the back as he was ready to draw a map for Buzz. Near the end of the movie, sometime before Andy comes back from cowboy camp, Etch, as well as the rest of the toys (then including Jessie, Bullseye, and the Aliens), were aligned to welcome Andy home, with a "Welcome Home, Andy" sign written on Etch.
Etch was sold in yard sale years after the second Toy Story, was mentioned by Woody, and only appeared in the archive footage of Andy as a kid in Toy Story 3.


==== Mr. Spell ====
Voiced by:
Jeff Pidgeon
Mr. Spell is based on a popular 1970s Speak & Spell toy by Texas Instruments. He frequently holds or has held seminars on a variety of topics such as "plastic corrosion awareness" and "what to do if you or part of you is swallowed." He also reveals the words he is saying.
When Andy's friends came to his birthday party, the toys panicked in thinking that they might be replaced with new toys and Mr. Spell, along with basically everyone else aside from Woody, ran to the window in panic to see the size of the presents. Then later, when Andy's friends were running up to his room, Woody told everyone to go back to their places and the toys began to scatter and Mr. Spell can be seen in the overhead shot running in fright and then again behind Mr. Potato Head.
In Toy Story 2, when Buster finds Woody, Mr. Spell displays 13.5, the amount of time in seconds it has elapsed for Buster to find Woody, setting a new record. Later, after Woody is stolen from a yard sale, Buzz uses Mr. Spell to help Andy's toys figure out who has stolen Woody.
Mr. Spell does not appear in Toy Story 3. He was sold in a yard sale along with Bo Beep, RC, Etch, Wheezy, and Rocky.


==== Rocky Gibraltar ====
Voiced by:
Jack Angel
Rocky Gibraltar, more simply referred to as Rocky, is a figure of a heavyweight wrestler, probably based on Wrestling Superstars collectible wrestling figures made by Hasbro. He is the second strongest toy in Andy's room, after Buzz Lightyear. In the first movie, he is seen lifting weights (Tinker Toys) with Snake, Buzz, Mr. Potato Head, and Rex. Rocky lifts the heaviest weights out of all of Andy's toys. As with Troll, Rocky is silent and plays a minor role in the movies, but he can speak in the Disney Adventures comics and in the Toy Story Activity Center CD-ROM game from Disney Interactive. In the Activity Center computer game, he can be seen on the top shelf playing cards with Hamm and speaks in third-person, saying, "Rocky needs to work on brain muscles." He is one of the toys who stand against Woody, who accidentally knocked Buzz off a window. After Woody throws RC off the moving truck, Rocky, under Mr. Potato Head's orders, spins Woody in the air and later tosses him off the truck personally. But when the toys realize that Woody's only use of RC is to help Buzz onto the truck, Bo Peep calls Rocky who then redeems himself by lowering the truck's ramp for them.
In Toy Story 2, Rocky, along with Sarge's toy soldiers, tries to hold back the door to prevent Buster from entering, but Buster rams the door open, causing Rocky and the soldiers to go flying. Rocky is also seen holding Wheezy as Wheezy begs Buzz to rescue Woody and when waving Buzz and his rescue squad goodbye as they leave on their mission. At the end of the movie, Rocky is seen enjoying Wheezy's rendition of "You've Got a Friend in Me." He only appears in the third film via archive footage of Andy as a child.
Rocky's name and a logo on his championship belt are references to the Rock of Gibraltar. Rocky is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer Video Game.


==== Lenny ====
Voiced by:
Joe Ranft (Toy Story)
Lenny (often known as Lenny the Binoculars) is a pair of wind up binoculars. He is used as binoculars by the other toys in various situations and is talkative when he warns the toys what he sees on his watch. Lenny does not speak in Toy Story 2, unlike the first film, and his role is more minor. Buzz uses Lenny to keep watch on Woody during the events at the yard sale until Al McWhiggin of Al's Toy Barn steals Woody. Lenny does not appear in Toy Story 3, but appears in archive footage from when Andy was young. Lenny, along with Bo Peep, RC, Wheezy, Rocky, Etch, Mr. Spell, and others, were sold, possibly at a yard sale, before Toy Story 3. Lenny is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer video game.


==== Other Toys of Andy's ====
Shark (voiced by Jack Angel)—Mr. Shark is a blue rubber squeeze toy shark. The back of him is never seen and he seems to spend most of his time in the toy box. He finds a new squeaker for Wheezy in Toy Story 2. He was sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3.
Snake and Robot—Snake and Robot are two toys who appeared in Toy Story and Toy Story 2. Snake is a green and purple jointed rattlesnake, Robot is a toy by Playskool. Robot can talk, Snake cannot. They live under Andy's bed. When Buzz was accidentally knocked out the window by Woody, Snake sided with Mr. Potato Head against Woody. Snake and Robot were sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3.
Troll—A female troll in a bikini with crazy pink hair. She was sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3.
Roly Poly Clown—Roly Poly Clown is a rocking, chiming clown toy for young children with a hand–painted jacket and yellow stripes and a party hat. It is one of Andy's toys, seen in Toy Story and Toy Story 2. While not being able to talk, he mainly communicates through facial expressions. The Roly Poly Clown also must rely on rolling around to get places, since he has no feet. When not out, the Roly Poly Clown resides in Andy's toy box. He was sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3, along with Etch, Bo Peep, Wheezy and the others, but, he made a cameo right behind of Snake while Andy is watching a movie in Andy's home videos in the Toy Story Complete Edition DVD only.
Toddle Tots—Toddle Tots are a set of toys directly taken from the Little Tikes company. They make brief appearances with Andy's toys throughout Toy Story and Toy Story 2, and are mostly heard making a high pitched squeak. The Tots include the Fireman Tots in their Toddle Tots Fire Truck, along with Cap Toddle Tot, Farmer Toddle Tot, Doc Toddle Tot, Hunter Toddle Tot, Painter Toddle Tot, Sailor Toddle Tot and a Shriner Toddle Tot in a little red car. They were sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3. However, they appear in Andy's home videos when Andy is watching a movie during Andy's archive footage.
Mike—Mike also known as Mr. Mike, a toy tape recorder by Playskool who helps Woody to amplify his voice when the toys have a staff meeting, and serves as a karaoke machine when Wheezy sings. He does not appear in Toy Story 3 as he was sold at a yard sale along with Lenny, Wheezy, Mr. Spell, Etch, Robot, Snake, Mr. Shark, RC, Rocky Gibraltar, Bo Peep, her sheep, the Troikas, Troll, Toddle Tots, the Toddle Tots Fire Truck, and Roly Poly Clown. He is seen in Andy's archive footage since Andy is a kid during Andy's home videos.
Troikas—The Troikas are a set of five plastic egg-shaped toys that don't speak, each in the style of Matryoshka doll with a picture of five animals: a dog (largest), a cat (second largest), a duck (medium), a fish (second smallest) and a ladybug (smallest). They are based on Little Tikes Nested Farm Animals. They were sold at a yard sale before Toy Story 3, along with Lenny, Wheezy, Mr. Spell, Etch, Robot, Snake, Mr. Shark, RC, Rocky, Bo Peep, her sheep, Mr. Mike, Troll, Toddle Tots, the Toddle Tots Fire Truck and Roly Poly Clown. They all appear in Andy's footage since Andy was a kid. He is seen in Andy's home videos when Andy is having his birthday only in the Toy Story 3 Complete Edition DVD only.
Barrel of Monkeys—The Barrel of Monkeys are Red monkeys and yellow barrel which is produced by Milton Bradley. In Toy Story, while Andy's family was at Pizza Planet, the toys used the barrel of monkeys to try to rescue Buzz, but there aren't enough monkeys to reach the ground. They appear during the outtakes in Toy Story 2 in which Mrs. Potato Head packs them into Mr. Potato Head's compartment, along with some monkey chow. In Toy Story 3, Woody, Buzz, Jessie and Rex are attacked by an enormous swarm of monkeys in the western action scene at the start of the film. Bonnie is shown to have a Barrel of Monkeys as seen in Hawaiian Vacation.
Hockey Puck—A hockey puck toy with short arms and legs and has yellow gloves and red feet and two red cruciate ice hockey sticks as his emblem. He only appears in Toy Story, apparently either being sold in a yard sale before Toy Story 2 or not appearing at all.


=== Bonnie's toys ===
These characters are the toys owned by Bonnie in Toy Story 3.


==== Chuckles ====
Voiced by:
Bud Luckey
Chuckles is a brokenhearted clown who was once owned by Daisy (along with Lotso and Big Baby), and is later owned by Bonnie. He is first seen mournfully looking out the kitchen window in Bonnie's house, where he tells Woody about Lotso's past, stating that Lotso used to be a good friend. Chuckles explains that he, Lotso, and Big Baby were accidentally left behind on a trip with Daisy's family, and when they finally made it back to Daisy's house, both him and Lotso discovered that Lotso had been replaced, which caused Lotso to snap. Chuckles objected when Lotso claimed all three had been replaced, but Lotso silenced him, and lied to Big Baby, saying that Daisy didn't love him anymore. After the three found their way to Sunnyside and Lotso took over, running it like a prison, Chuckles was damaged and Bonnie found him and took him home. He still feels sorry for what happened to Lotso, but knows that what Lotso is doing at Sunnyside is wrong. He gives Woody a pendant (which belonged to Big Baby) that says My heart belongs to Daisy, which later leads Big Baby to discover Lotso's deception and turn on him. In one of the end credits sequences, Chuckles sees a crayon-drawn picture of him, and Dolly says that "Bonnie really got your smile," making Chuckles happy again.
Chuckles returns in the short film Hawaiian Vacation and he sings a Hawaiian love song while playing a ukelele when Barbie and Ken get their recreated Hawaiian adventures. He also appears in Small Fry.


==== Dolly ====
Voiced by:
Bonnie Hunt
Dolly is a soft dress-up rag doll with purple hair, googly-eyes, an orange dress with buttons sewn on, and gently blushing cheeks. She helps Woody get back to Sunnyside Daycare Center with the rest of Andy's toys. In the Toy Story 3 video game, she is seen as a witch. It is indicated that she is the leader of Bonnie's toys.
Dolly appears in the theatrical short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, and Partysaurus Rex.


==== Mr. Pricklepants ====
Voiced by:
Timothy Dalton
Mr. Pricklepants is a stuffed hedgehog. He wears lederhosen and a Tyrolean hat, and views himself as a thespian. Mr. Pricklepants was made in Germany (although he speaks with an English accent and actor's diction, which may also refer to his previous role in The Rocketeer as a German character whilst the actor Dalton who portrayed him is actually British) and is from the Waldfreunde (Forest Friends) collection of premium imported plush toys, presumably a reference to Steiff plush toys. Throughout Toy Story 3, he expresses great interest in theater arts and in the same respect, takes the art of role playing as a child's toy very seriously. Buttercup refers to him sarcastically as "Baron von Shush" due to his habit of "shushing" the other toys when they break character. Before the film ends, he is seen walking and talking with Hamm. During the credits, he plays Romeo, with one of the aliens playing Juliet.
Mr. Pricklepants reappears in the short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, and Partysaurus Rex, and appeared in the TV specials Toy Story of Terror! and Toy Story That Time Forgot.


==== Trixie ====
Voiced by:
Kristen Schaal
Trixie is a blue toy Triceratops. who may be of the same toyline as Rex. During one of Bonnie's toys' improv sessions, she mentions coming from the doctor with "life-changing news." She chats online with "a dinosaur toy down the street" who goes by the name "Velocistar237." She becomes best friends with Rex during the credits, playing cooperatively on a computer.
Trixie reappears in the short films Hawaiian Vacation, Small Fry, and Partysaurus Rex, and appears in the TV specials Toy Story of Terror! and Toy Story That Time Forgot.


==== Buttercup ====
Voiced by:
Jeff Garlin
Buttercup is a white unicorn with a yellow mane and a pink nose. Despite his appearance, he has a very gruff voice and sarcastic personality. He is the first to introduce himself to Woody when Bonnie brings him home, and tells Woody, along with Trixie, Dolly, Mr. Pricklepants, and Chuckles, about Lotso's evil agenda. He later appears at the end of the movie, now very close friends with Hamm.
He also appears in Small Fry, Hawaiian Vacation, and Partysaurus Rex.
He is the first Pixar character to be a unicorn, before Rainbow Unicorn from Inside Out.


==== Peas-in-a-Pod ====
Voiced by
Charlie Bright, Amber Kroner, and Brianna Maiwand in Toy Story 3
Zoe Levin in Hawaiian Vacation
Peas-in-a-Pod are three soft, plush green balls in a green zip-up case that looks like a pea pod, hence the name. They are based on the Vegimals peas. They have the personalities of small children, and their names are Peaty, Peatrice, and Peanelope.
The Peas-in-a-Pod reappear in the short film Hawaiian Vacation, all voiced this time by Zoe Levin. They also appear in Small Fry.


==== Angel Kitty ====
Voiced by
Emma Hudak
Angel Kitty is a Christmas ornament that only appears in Toy Story the Time That Forgot. A running gag in the film is Angel Kitty giving a moral about Christmas much to other toys' (mostly Trixie) dismay and joy. She is mostly seen with a trumpet giving morals. She was last seen in Toy Story the Time That Forgot giving one last moral and "vanishes".


==== Totoro ====
The title character from My Neighbor Totoro, who is also the mascot of Studio Ghibli, appears as one of Bonnie's toys. He is a big plush toy and does not speak at all during the film, nor is he spoken to by anyone by his name. He does however display his famous grin during the credit scenes, and at the end of the film, he is seen juggling the alien triplets, while Mr. and Mrs. Potato Head watch. According to the tie-in book, The Art of Toy Story 3, Totoro's appearance in the film was meant to be a tribute to Hayao Miyazaki, who is a close friend of Pixar executive John Lasseter. In addition to Lasseter's relationship to Miyazaki, another factor that contributed to Totoro's appearance was Disney's role in dubbing Studio Ghibli films for their English-language releases.


=== Sid and Hannah's toys ===
The following toys are only seen in the first film.


==== Combat Carl ====
Combat Carl is a recurring G.I. Joe-type toy character. He first appears as Sid's doll who's blown up by a huge M-80, in Sid's first scene (technically dead). He is later seen as pieces coming out of the ground to frighten Sid.
Combat Carl later appears in Toy Story of Terror!. However, he is shown to be a more different character than the one that appeared in the first film: as opposed to being Caucasian, this Combat Carl is African-American in appearance. He and several toys once belonged to a boy named Billy until they were stolen by the manager of Sleep Wells Motels when Billy and his family were visiting the motel. In the television special, Carl spends most of his time to avoid being caught and had lost his right hand to the manager's pet iguana. Following the arrival of Bonnie's toys, Carl tries to help them to avoid being taken, but fails and ends up being captured along with them. However, when Jessie escapes, she tries to rescue Woody from being sold, but had to face her claustrophobia, which Carl inspired her to do so. Jessie finally manage to recover Carl's missing hand while secretly exposing the manager's scheme to Bonnie and her mother, who then calls the police to arrest the manager for stealing and attempting to sell her daughter's toys. Carl and the rest of Billy's toys then took the opportunity to escape from the motels. In the end, Carl reattaches his missing hand and he and Billy's toys board on a mail truck, presumably to get back to Billy's house for good. Another interesting note about this character is that he refers to himself in the third person.


==== Hannah's dolls ====
For Janie, see "Janie and Pterodactyl" under "Mutant toys."
Sally—Sally is Hannah's replacement doll for Janie. Sally has brown hair and a yellow dress. After Sid is attacked by the toys, Sid sees Sally, then runs off in fright, thinking that Sally will come to life. Hannah then chases Sid upstairs into his room, trying to scare him more.
Marie Antoinette and her little sister—Marie Antoinette and her little sister are a company of two headless dolls from Hannah's tea party. One is Barbie without her original legs (she has spare legs from a rag doll body), and the second is rag doll in violet bloom dress. A dark brown headless teddy bear is also seen with the dolls. It is because Sid tortured Hannah's toys. Yet, she is able to play with them. "Marie Antoinette" is probably a nickname (given by Buzz), based on their headlessness rather than the actual name of one of the toys.


==== Mutant toys ====
The Mutant Toys are unfortunate, mutilated toys who live their unhappy lives in the darkest corners of Sid's room. They are assembled by Sid from mixed pieces of several toys that belong to him and Hannah (hence the baby doll's parts). They cannot speak (probably due to the mutilations they suffered); though it is revealed they know morse code. They also look horrifying (in fact, Woody and Buzz think they're cannibals who are going to eat them), but they actually are friendly and timid. They fix Buzz's broken arm (as well as repairing Janie and the Pterodactyl) and also help Woody realize his plan to save Buzz from the clutches of Sid. They close in on Sid as Woody tells Sid how much they hate being mutilated, and they all rejoice in victory after Woody frightens Sid away with his own voice. In Toy Story Treats, the Mutant Toys appear in Andy's house (it was unknown if they were visiting or if Andy adopted them).
Baby Face (A.K.A. "Spider Baby") — The leader of the mutant toys, she is a one-eyed female Baby Doll head staked on top of a spider-like body with crab-like pincers made of Erector set pieces. Baby Face lives in the shadows under Sid's bed. One way Baby Face communicates with the other toys is by banging in Morse code on the side of Sid's metal bedpost with her big claw. This method is used when she signals the other mutant toys to gather around to listen to Woody as he formulates his plan to rescue Buzz from Sid. When the mutant toys gain on Sid, Baby Face, suspended by Legs, lands on Sid's head, scaring him. Baby Face is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer Video Game.
Legs — A toy fishing rod with Barbie doll legs. She is shown to be very strong, being able to hold Ducky's and Baby Face's weight. When Woody formulates his plan to save Buzz from Sid, he assigns Legs to partner up with Ducky. Legs opens the vent grating so she and Ducky can go to the front porch, where Legs lowers Ducky through the hole Ducky created so Ducky can swing toward the doorbell. After Ducky catches the Frog, Legs pulls both toys up to safety. Later, when the mutant toys advance on Sid, Legs lowers Baby Face onto Sid's head, scaring him.
Hand-in-the-Box—Hand-in-the-box is based on the character Thing from the 1960s TV horror spoof The Addams Family. A green rubber arm that emerges from a black box, it appears to be based on the electro-mechanical coin-bank that was marketed as part of the show's merchandising. During Woody's plan to save Buzz from Sid, Hand-in-the-box, held by Rockmobile mounted on Babyface's head, extends its hand to the doorknob, ready to open the door when the signal comes. After the Frog is let out the room to distract Scud, Hand-in-the-box mounts Roller Bob (held by Rockmobile) and extends its hand to pull Jingle Joe (carrying Janie and the Pterodactyl) when Woody motions the other mutant toys to go down to Sid's backyard. The Hand also grabs Sid's leg when the mutant toys surround him.
Roller Bob — A jet pilot action figure, whose torso has been attached to an old-school mini-skateboard. After the Frog is let out of Sid's room to distract Scud, Roller Bob ferries Woody and the other mutant toys outside the house to Sid's yard.
The Frog — The speediest toy of all. A tin wind-up frog with two different wheels (left is from an erector set and right is from a monster truck) instead of back legs. The Frog is missing his left front foot. As part of Woody's plot to rescue Buzz from Sid, Woody orders, "Wind the Frog!", and the Walking Car twists the wind-up key on the Frog's back to provide energy. When Ducky rings the doorbell, the Frog is let out of Sid's room, allowing Scud to chase him down the stairs and out to the front porch, where he is caught by Ducky, and Legs reels both toys up to safety.
Jingle Joe — another triple toy combination. He is a Combat Carl head staked on top of a Melody Push Chime toddler toy (possibly from the one Sid blew up earlier in the film) with an arm which is missing from a Mickey Mouse figure. He appears at the part when he turns Woody's flashlight off by pressing the button. He helps in the plan to save Buzz by supplying motion for Janie and the Pterodactyl when there is no room on Roller Bob.
Muscle Duck (Ducky) — The result of triple toy combination: a duck-headed Pez dispenser with a baby doll torso and plunger base. Other than Janie, he is the only one of Sid's toys that can communicate orally. He and Legs go to the front porch via the vent, and Ducky, suspended from the porch ceiling by Legs, swings toward the doorbell until he finally activates it, giving Woody the signal to release the Frog. Ducky catches the Frog as Legs reels both toys up to safety.
Rockmobile — A figure with an insect's head (it looks like a weird hybrid of fly and praying mantis) who sits in a headless upper torso of Rocky Gibraltar, in which is a steering wheel from a toy car. Rockmobile also walks on the Rocky doll's hands.
Walking Car — A yellow 1957 Austin-Healey 3000 car with small baby doll arms. He can run and climb very quickly. As part of Woody's plot to save Buzz from Sid, when Woody orders to wind the Frog, the Walking Car twists the screw on the Frog's back, giving the Frog enough energy to speed from Sid's room to the porch.
Janie and Pterodactyl — Hannah's beloved rag doll, Janie, and Sid's creepy toy, Pterodactyl (a small plastic pterodactyl), are the subjects of Sid's last "operation", called a "double bypass brain transplant" (he ripped off their heads and replaced Janie's head with a pterodactyl's). The mutant toys later put their heads on the correct bodies. After the Frog is released from Sid's room for Scud to chase after, Janie and the Pterodactyl ride Jingle Joe (since Roller Bob has run out of capacity) as Woody motions the toys to go down to Sid's backyard. Janie has yellow hair and a striped dress.
Additionally, when Sid is attacked, there can be seen a bunch of other broken toys, including a chewed Squeeze Toy Alien (the one that Sid gave to Scud), a burned rag doll (who repeatedly utters "Mama!"), a huge red pickup truck, an armless yellow soldier with a nail in his head, and a headless yellow soldier with a broken leg.


== Toy characters by location ==


=== Al's Toy Barn and apartment ===
Shown in a Buzz Lightyear commercial in Toy Story, this section contains characters from Toy Story 2. Al's Toy Barn appears in Toy Story 3: The Video Game.


==== Stinky Pete the Prospector ====
Voiced by:
Kelsey Grammer
Stinky Pete, also known as Stinky Pete the Prospector, is a prospector doll and one of the main antagonists of Toy Story 2. He is a toy modeled after a character on the fictional television show, Woody's Roundup, where the characters consists of Sheriff Woody, Jessie, Stinky Pete, and Bullseye. The Prospector doll seen in the film had never been opened and was still "Mint in the Box" making him sought after by thousands of collectors.
In contrast to the character on the show, Stinky Pete is quite intelligent, manipulative, and well-spoken and, when he first appears, he seems to be a grandfather figure and mentor. However, he becomes embittered because he has never been sold until Al McWhiggin eventually found him. Stinky Pete makes no secret of his hatred for space toys like Buzz Lightyear, whom he blames for causing the show to be canceled after the launch of Sputnik, causing children all over America to lose their interest in cowboy toys, shifting their interest to space adventures instead.
Years after being purchased, Stinky Pete would spend years in storage while Al bought more toys and advertisements from Woody's Roundup. After Al had stolen Woody, Stinky Pete and Jessie were excited because now they could go to the Konishi Toy Museum in Japan, where they will be treated with respect. Woody reveals that he has an owner named Andy Davis, which infuriates Jessie and leads the Prospector to make a goal and make sure Woody does not go back to Andy at any cost, despite the fact that he is now aware that Al actually has stolen Woody because he still belongs to Andy.
When Al accidentally rips off Woody's arm, Stinky Pete secretly leaves his box and every time he sabotages Woody's attempts to recover his arm by turning the TV on to prevent Woody from returning to Andy. He frames Jessie for this by putting the TV remote near her before returning to his box and pretends that he "doesn't know" how the TV turned on. He later convinces Woody to wait until his arm is supposed to be fixed in the morning, to which is done after Al calls in a cleaner. After Woody's arm is fixed, Stinky Pete convinces Woody after a story that Jessie tells him about her old owner, that Andy won't play with him anymore by the time he goes to college, because in Japan, Woody will be treasured forever. Woody agrees to stay with them instead of going back to Andy, much to Stinky Pete's and Jessie's delight.
However, Woody's friends arrive during a celebration of going to Japan and they demand that Woody return to Andy, but Woody angrily refuses, resulting in the toys sadly saying goodbye and leaving without him. However, before leaving, Buzz says an upset goodbye to Woody by saying that he'll be staying behind glass forever and not being loved again if he chooses to go to Japan, leaving Woody to think over his choice. However, Woody has a change of heart, and tells Buzz that he is coming with them, and invites his friends to come with him to Andy's house. However, Stinky Pete is very angry with Woody for attempting to leave with Jessie and Bullseye back to Andy's house, and once again he sabotages Woody's attempts every time by tightening the bolt to the vent and uses his pick axe to turn off the TV, causing Woody to realize that it was the Prospector who turned on the TV the previous night instead of Jessie. He sees unpopular toys like him and the Roundup Gang doomed to either always ending up in storage or "spending a lifetime on a dime store shelf watching every other toy be sold," similar to his fate before Al found him. He also sees children as destroyers of toys whose ultimate fate will be "spending eternity rotting in some landfill". This makes him all the more determined to go to the Tokyo museum and become an exhibit for the rest of his life, unlike Woody and Jessie.
When an angry Stinky Pete punches Buzz off the ramp at the airport, Woody confronts and fights Stinky Pete for harming his friend, but Stinky Pete, attempting to finish him off, threatens to rip Woody's right arm, assuring him that he will be fixed again in Japan. Fortunately, the other toys blind and stun Stinky Pete with flash cameras that the toys found after they confused and mistook another green luggage for Woody's. Buzz, surviving the fall, captures Stinky Pete and Woody instructs Buzz and the other toys to dump Stinky Pete into a Barbie doll backpack that belongs to a little girl named Amy, who enjoys decorating her dolls' faces with tattoos, as punishment and revenge for his betrayal, knowing it will make him learn the true meaning of playtime. Upon learning of Amy's occupations of decorating her dolls, Stinky Pete starts to weep as he is taken to his new owner's home. Ironically, this fate is a rectification of a past injustice done to Stinky Pete. Since much of his anger came from never being sold nor even being opened; now he is finally being owned by a child after waiting 50 years.
However, after the film's release, the film's website featured interviews with the characters. In Stinky Pete's interview, he has reformed and said that he has become accustomed to Amy decorating him, as well of being fond of Amy herself.
Despite his appearance, Stinky Pete does not appear in the third film, because he was no longer mentioned, though he seems to accurately predict the events of the third film. He asks Woody if Andy will take him to college, and later tells the rest of the toys that children destroy toys, which occurs in the Sunnyside Daycare, and that they will end up in a landfill, where the toys are narrowly rescued from the incinerator after an escape attempt. Stinky Pete once questions Woody about Andy not playing with Woody anymore when Andy goes to college, but in Toy Story 3, his prediction nearly comes true.
According to his box, Stinky Pete had only a total of 9 sayings. In one outtake, Stinky Pete is seen talking to two Barbie dolls in the box, promising them a role in the third film (in a funny turn of events, Barbie, of course, did appear in the third film as a titular character) implying that he may have learned some acting tips before. In another outtake, Stinky Pete gives Woody a choice to go back to Andy's home or stay, until he suffers a bout of flatulence, where he later implies to be the reason for his nickname.
Despite the fact that he does not appear in the third film, Stinky Pete does appear in the Toy Box Mode of Toy Story 3: The Video Game.
According to the DVD commentary, the Pixar team had deliberated for a while what the proper comeuppance for the Prospector would be before it was decided for him to be placed in a Barbie bag with a face-painted Barbie.


==== Buzz Lightyear #2 ====
Voiced by:
Tim Allen
After trapping Andy's Buzz in a box, he is mistaken for the original Buzz by the gang. When Rex mentions that he knows how to defeat Emperor Zurg—having recently acquired a walkthrough guide for the Buzz Lightyear video game that he's been stuck on—Buzz #2 quickly decides to tag along thinking that the toys were trying to find Zurg. While the gang search Al's Toy Barn and through the vents of Al's apartment with Buzz #2, they become increasingly suspicious of his cocky attitude ("I'm Buzz Lightyear! I'm always sure!") and strange actions, until they are finally reunited with Andy's Buzz, who defuses his counterpart's confusion by claiming that the situation is a 'Code 546' (Precisely what this involves is unknown, but it prompted Buzz #2 to refer to Woody as "Your Majesty").
Heading to the elevator on the way down, they encounter a savage Emperor Zurg toy and Buzz #2 engages him in battle. When Buzz #2 claims Zurg killed his father, Zurg responds he is his father, causing Buzz #2 to scream in dismay (a parody of The Empire Strikes Back). Rex defeats Zurg by accident, sending him falling off the elevator to his apparent doom by knocking him off-balance with his tail when he turns away as Zurg prepares to shoot Buzz #2, upsetting him. He is last seen playing catch with his "dad," the Zurg toy, whose attitude towards the other Buzz has changed after the fall.


==== Evil Emperor Zurg ====
Voiced by:
Andrew Stanton (1999–present)
Wayne Knight in Buzz Lightyear of Star Command
Jess Harnell (mini counterpart)
Evil Emperor Zurg is a space villain action figure and Buzz Lightyear's archenemy. He has red evil eyes with neon gritting teeth, silver horns on his head, a purple tunic with a black cape on it and his weapon, a gun (which has a power control that, as an homage to This is Spinal Tap, goes to 11). In some cases, he does not have a gun but a hand like the one on his other arm. In the first film, Zurg is a referenced character, and does not appear at all. However, Zurg is first seen in the opening sequence of the second film when Buzz is trying to take his main power away from him (Zurg's main power is from an AA battery which is actually revealed to be a hologram). In the ensuing battle, Zurg vaporizes the top half of Buzz Lightyear's body with his gun, killing him. The sequence then cuts showing that the opening sequence was actually a video game played by Rex. As the story progresses, a Zurg toy in Al's Toy Barn bursts out from its box and follows Andy's Buzz Lightyear, who is on the way to rescue Woody from Al McWhiggin. Zurg is deluded, similar to Andy's Buzz in the first film. In the second film, another copy of Buzz Lightyear, who also acts similar to Buzz in the first film, escapes from Al's Toy Barn and battles with Zurg (who says exactly the same thing he said in the video game before the fight) using toy components (pin balls and lights). In a reference to the relationship of Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader, the principal hero and villain respectively of the original Star Wars trilogy, Evil Emperor Zurg claims he is in fact the father of Buzz, in an almost word-for-word parody of the scene in The Empire Strikes Back. As Zurg attempts to finish off Buzz #2 (at point-blank range), Rex accidentally hits Zurg with his large tail, sending him falling down the elevator shaft. The second Buzz then looks over the shaft and reaches his hand out, thinking he has lost his father, while Rex is excited that he has finally managed to defeat Zurg in real life. Near the end of the film, Zurg is seen to have survived his fall with a bent horn and is now playing catch with the Buzz copy. He supposedly bumped his head so hard so as he forgot he was Buzz Lightyear's worst enemy. The second Buzz Lightyear then says, "Oh, you're a great dad!" as he rushes to catch another ball fired by Zurg. In the novelisation, however, Zurg is killed by the fall, Buzz #2 finds him and takes him back to Al's Toy Barn to bury him.
Zurg is mentioned in the third film by Buzz in his bad guy character after Lotso resets him to Demo mode. Zurg appears briefly during a sequence in the end credits, where he is donated to Sunnyside Daycare center and greeted by Stretch.
Zurg also appears in Buzz Lightyear of Star Command and its direct-to-video movie Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins. Zurg says he is Lightyear's father during a fight in order to shock Lightyear, before regaining the advantage during the fight and then denying the truth of that previous claim. Whether or not this is actually true, Buzz definitely does not know who his father is. This version of Zurg is also severely lightened up, going from the movie's Darth Vader-esque version to a far less intimidating one; in the TV series Zurg is a flamboyant villain who is just as much a comic relief character as he is a formidable opponent, similar to Skeletor. This Zurg is known for videotaping Buzz's speeches, maintaining a troll doll collection, and various other comedic habits. He is shown to have a bit of a British accent throughout the series. It is revealed in the first episode that there is a Nana Zurg, but she is never seen at all (although he claims that she's "plenty evil"). Zurg would appear to be a cyborg of some description, also much like Darth Vader. However, it has also been discussed amongst fans that his "cybernetic" traits could also very well be because of advanced technology. There is yet to be a clear answer. In the TV series, he is the warlord-like ruler of an evil empire and is in command of an army of Hornet robots, as well of a minion workforce consisting of Grubs and Brainpods. The seat of which is the hellish Planet Z (standing for Xrghthung). In various media surrounding the film, his planet is said to be called Xrghthung. However, because this is unpronounceable in the TV series it is changed to simply "Z." It is unknown whether Zurg rules over any other worlds, but, if he does, they have not been revealed. Planet Z evidently possesses vast resources and forces enabling Zurg to be a serious threat to the Galactic Alliance. Despite being frequently gullible and bungling, Zurg is evidently highly intelligent, able to concoct sound military tactics and Machiavellian evil schemes. Additionally, he occasionally references stereotypes of typical evil villains and intentionally violates them, showing how aware he is of his similarity to them. For example, when designing a vast prison on Planet Z, he declines building an execution arena, for it simply "gives the captives more time to get away." When he was designing a schematic for a new base, he expressedly forbade for air vents that allow "hero-sized objects" into the control room. "And, may I remind you, no giant trash compactor! When heroes fall in, they always have enough time to figure a way out. Make it—an incinerator!"
Despite his camp nature, he is just as fearsome and ruthless as his movie counterpart. Zurg is frequently mentioned to be the most evil villain in the galaxy and appears to possess authority over all other villains. In fact, he would appear to be a physical manifestation of pure evil. He is particularly proud of this and frequently brags of how "evil" he is. He is a parody of Darth Vader on Star Wars, Darkseid on DC Comics, Ming the Merciless on Flash gordon, Megatron on Transformers as well as The Six Million Dollar Man
Zurg appears as a playable character in Toy Story 3: The Video Game on the PlayStation 3 in Toy Box Mode after completing several missions. He also has a convertible (the ZurgsMobile) that matches his personality. His mini counterpart is featured in a short called Small Fry.
Zurg recently appeared in the 2015 Live-Action Disney Movie, Tomorrowland.


==== Tour Guide Barbie ====
Voiced by:
Jodi Benson
Tour Guide Barbie is a Barbie doll initially from Al's Toy Barn in Toy Story 2. When Hamm, Slinky Dog, Rex and Mr. Potato Head come upon the Barbie aisle at Al's Toy Barn while searching for Woody, Tour Guide Barbie hops into the toy car they are driving. She gives the toys a tour in the toy barn and helps them locate Buzz Lightyear (they actually find a different, 'limited-edition' Buzz Lightyear). After the outtakes of the film, Tour Guide Barbie waves goodbye to the audience until her face hurts from smiling. She then leaves for a break.


=== Sunnyside Daycare ===
These characters live at Sunnyside Daycare Centre. All appear in Toy Story 3 only.


==== Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear ====
Voiced by:
Ned Beatty
Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear (Lotso for short) is a plush, purple teddy bear with a big plum nose, a sweet strawberry scent and a southern accent, who uses a wooden toy mallet as a cane. He is the self-proclaimed leader of the toys at the Sunnyside Daycare Center and is the main antagonist of the third film. He initially acts like a kind-hearted and wise caretaker, but is later revealed to be warden, although his backstory makes him more of a tragic villain.
In Toy Story 3, he welcomes Andy's toys to Sunnyside and assigns them to the Caterpillar Room, where they are roughly played with by the youngest children. At Bonnie's house, Woody hears from Chuckles that Lotso, Chuckles, and Big Baby were once owned and loved by a girl named Daisy. Lotso became Daisy's favorite toy when she unwrapped him on Christmas. During their time with Daisy, Lotso was considered a kind-hearted friend to both Chuckles and Big Baby. One day, Daisy and her family had a picnic in the countryside. When she fell asleep, her parents put her into the car and drove away, accidentally leaving the toys behind. Not wanting to give up, Lotso led his two friends on a long trek back to Daisy's house, only to discover that Daisy had gotten another Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear. Confused and feeling betrayed, Lotso became embittered, convinced Big Baby that they had been replaced, and they left Daisy's home, with Chuckles (who knew the truth) reluctantly following. Later, Lotso discovered Sunnyside Daycare Center and turned it into an internment camp for toys. Big Baby took on the role of Lotso's enforcer while Chuckles was found by Bonnie and taken home.
Meanwhile, Lotso's minions catch Buzz outside of the Caterpillar Room and restrain him in the library when Lotso comes in, having learned that Buzz is actually requesting a transfer of himself and the rest of Andy's toys to the Butterfly Room. Thinking of Buzz to be useful to him, Lotso grants it only to him, stating that the kids going to the Caterpillar Room really need some toys to play with. Buzz understands what Lotso meant, but respectfully refuses, saying that he and the rest of Andy's toys stay together as a family. Lotso then orders his henchmen to switch to Buzz's demo mode. He manipulates Buzz into imprisoning the rest of the Andy's toys with the help of the minions. It's at this point that they toys discover Lotso's true, cruel nature.
When Woody returns, he works on a plan to help everyone escape and turn Buzz back to normal, but they reset Buzz to Spanish mode (and was later set back to play mode). Andy's toys work on their plan to escape the daycare center. Lotso corners them and gives a last offer for them to stay at Sunnyside just as a garbage truck comes along, but the toys refuse, calling him a liar and a bully (especially Jessie and Woody). When Lotso orders Stretch to push the toys into the dumpster, Ken tries to stop Lotso, but Lotso teases him for loving Barbie. Ken disagrees and Lotso, furious, throws him across to join the other toys. Woody then brings up the subject of Daisy, leading into an argument between him and the stuffed bear. Woody throws out Big Baby's "Daisy" name-tag, causing Big Baby to regain his memory of Daisy. Lotso is outraged at this and snaps out at Big Baby, calling him a baby before smashing the name tag to pieces with his mallet. He then orders a now reluctant Stretch to push the toys into the dumpster, pokes Big Baby with his cane, and reveals his true feelings about toys: that they're trash waiting to be thrown away, destroyed, and forgotten. Angered by this act of treachery, Big Baby turns against Lotso and throws him into the dumpster. When one of the toy aliens gets stuck in the lid (presumably after being pulled by Lotso), seeking revenge, Lotso pulls Woody in with him, forcing Woody's friends to follow them to the landfill.
At the landfill, the toys end up on a conveyor belt leading to a shredder. Finding Lotso stuck under a large golf bag, Woody and Buzz rescue him and escape the shredder, only to find they have ended up on another belt leading to an incinerator. As they are about to reach the incinerator, Lotso sees an emergency stop button, and with Woody and Buzz's help, manages to reach it. However, rather than pushing the button, he walks away and leaves them to their deaths. As the toys resign themselves to their fate, the Squeeze Toy Aliens grab them from the rubble with a giant crane claw. Woody talks Hamm and Slinky out of seeking revenge against Lotso as he believes Lotso not worth it. Lotso (who is unaware that the toys are still alive) is eventually found by a garbage man (who recalls that he once had a Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear as a kid) and straps Lotso to the grill of a garbage truck with three other toys before driving away.
Lotso was originally going to be in the first film, but the technology to make the fur right had yet to exist for the first and second films, so he was saved for the third film. An early version of Lotso can be seen in the first film when Woody says "Everybody hear me? Up on the shelf, can you hear me? Great!" and can be seen in the second film in Andy's room.
Test audiences who had sympathized with Lotso for his backstory had wanted him to push the button in the incinerator scene to redeem himself. However, according to the DVD commentary, director Lee Unkrich explained that Lotso not pushing the button to save the Toys was meant for the audience to really care about the characters after three films of getting to know them when it looked like it was the end for them in the incinerator. The Pixar team took note of the people's concerns and made Lotso to be an outright, selfish liar.
Lotso also makes a cameo appearance in Pixar's 2009 movie Up in a little girl's room in the city where Mr. Fredricksen's house goes by in the bottom left corner in the shadow of the bed.
Ned Beatty was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Villain for his performance as Lotso, and Pixar and he received widespread praise for the character's back story and Beatty's performance. IGN named Lotso the best villain of the summer of 2010.


==== Ken ====
Voiced by:
Michael Keaton
Ken is a smooth-talking doll who falls in love with Barbie. He first appears wearing light blue pleated and cuffed shorts, and a tucked-in leopard-print shirt with short sleeves. His accessories include matching ascot, sensible loafers and a fashion-forward gold belt. He lives in Ken's Dreamhouse, a big yellow doll house with three stories, a large wardrobe room, and an elevator. Barbie originally breaks up with Ken when she finds him, Lotso, and a reset Buzz Lightyear locking up her friends. Piqued, Ken orders her locked up as well.
However, as part of a plan to escape, she pretends to forgive Ken, gaining access to his dream house. Barbie then ties Ken hostage to try to get him to reveal how to reset Buzz back to normal. As a provocation, she rips his clothing apart. Ken reveals the truth after she begins to sabotage his Nehru jacket. He is not seen again until Lotso has the toys cornered at the dumpster. Ken comes to Barbie's help by trying to stop Lotso, having realized Barbie through her understanding of civics. Lotso tells Ken "there's 100,000,000 just like her", but Ken insists that for him, there is no one else like her, and wins back her affections.
In the end credits of the film, he and Barbie are seen greeting new toys at Sunnyside as Barbie becomes his girlfriend again, and they both take charge of the Sunnyside toys as the new leaders. He resembles a real doll from 1988 called Animal Lovin' Ken. Due to being called a "girl's toy," it is often joked about his femininity: such as his large selection and obsession with clothes, him wearing Barbie's scarf, his rather feminine boxer-shorts, Bookworm not being suspicious seeing who he believed being Ken (Barbie in a spacesuit outfit) in high heels, as well as at the end Buzz believing Barbie wrote them the fancy note, only to discover Ken's signature at the end.
Ken, along with Barbie, appears in the theatrical short, Hawaiian Vacation, in which the two embark on a journey to Hawaii, but ends up in Bonnie's room, where Woody and the other toys reenact various Hawaiian scenes.


==== Big Baby ====
Big Baby is a Bitty Baby doll with a lazy eye who carries around a bottle and is adorned with childlike scribbling that resembles ferocious tattoos. He normally does not speak, instead communicating through baby sounds, with the exception of one spoken line after the toys escape Sunnyside.
Big Baby was once one of Daisy's toys before he, Lotso, and Chuckles were lost at a rest area. After returning home, Lotso lied to Big Baby that Daisy replaced them and arrived at Sunnyside. While there, Lotso took full control and Big Baby acted as his second-in-command and enforcer at Sunnyside. Eventually, Woody reveals to Lotso that Daisy still cared about them, causing Big Baby to regain his memory of his former owner, whom he called "Mama". Lotso, infuriated, insults and bullies Big Baby for his attachment to Daisy and destroys the name tag by smashing it to pieces with his mallet, and pokes Big Baby for being a dummy. Angered by that, Big Baby turns against Lotso where he throws him in the dumpster (A parody of a scene from Return of the Jedi), blows him a raspberry, and helps Woody and his friends escape Sunnyside.
In the credits, Big Baby is shown to be having a happier time at Sunnyside under Barbie and Ken's care and is seen happily hugging and spinning the couple. At a party at Sunnyside he is shown wearing gold just like Barbie and Ken. The baby who provided the voice for Big Baby is named "Woody," according to Lee Unkrich's Twitter account, and the film's credits confirm it as being Woody Smith (listed under Additional Voices).


==== Twitch ====
Voiced by:
John Cygan
Twitch is a green "insectaloid warrior" action figure with a bug's head, orange eyes with ferocious chomping mandibles, wings, and two muscular arms. He is one of the toy thugs working for Lotso. He helps to reprogram Buzz, and later apprehends Andy's other toys. He keeps a search light working in the playground. He and Sparks "break" the Chatter telephone before he is convinced of Lotso's evil by Woody and Ken. Because of how Lotso abused Big Baby, Twitch turns on Lotso, along with the other gang members. During the credits, he is seen living in a happier Sunnyside and is shown taking a turn to endure playtime with the young children in the Caterpillar Room, switching with Chunk so he can rest.
Twitch is reminiscent of the 1980s "He-Man and the Masters of the Universe" toy line, and other similar lines.


==== Stretch ====
Voiced by:
Whoopi Goldberg
Stretch is a toy rubber octopus with sticky suckers on her eight long arms and a glittery, purple body. She is Lotso's only henchwoman, and at first welcomes the toys, but later helps capture them with her elastic tentacles. With her cohorts, she later catches Woody and his friends, and was eager to push them into the dumpster, should they not admit defeat. Stretch was seen to be the first toy to doubt Lotso's leadership and motives, as she was seen to visibly cringe at Lotso's true character being revealed. After Lotso destroys Big Baby's locket, he angrily orders Stretch to push Woody and his friends into the dumpster, which Stretch is now reluctant to do, causing Lotso to reveal his true feelings about all toys. Eventually, Lotso is thrown into the dumpster by Big Baby for his lies and treachery, and Stretch immediately leaves the area, shocked at what had happened but relieved. In the credits, she welcomes new toys happily without Lotso and is later seen sneaking a message to Woody and the gang in Bonnie's backpack. She is based on a purple Wacky WallWalker toy from the 1980s.


==== Chunk ====
Voiced by:
Jack Angel
Chunk is an orange muscular rock monster toy. He has two red eyes when fierce, blue eyes when he's friendly, huge fists, and a face that you can change by rolling it up or down to a different facial expression or pressing a button at the top of his head. He welcomes the toys to Sunnyside, but later helps Lotso and Buzz imprison them. He is then convinced of Lotso's deception when he abuses Big Baby, and is seen helping Woody and his friends climb to safety. In the credits, he is seen taking the abuse of the younger children, later taking a rest while Twitch takes his place. He is based on the short lived Rock Lords toyline.
Chunk has a very low level of intelligence: During a gambling scene, he describes Buzz as "He ain't the sharpest knife in the.....place...where they...keep the knives". He enjoys teasing Ken during the gambling scene since he called him a "girl's toy."


==== Sparks ====
Voiced by:
Jan Rabson
Sparks is a robot toy at Sunnyside Daycare. He has shown to be both blunt and sarcastic. Sparks' retro design has flashing red LED eyes and a blaster cavity in his chest that spits out real sparks when he's rolling around on his wheels, but is completely safe for children. He sports telescoping arms with working pincers and he can also elevate his body to make himself taller. He starts out as one of Lotso's henchmen, but in the dumpster scene, when Ken states that Lotso put all of the toys in Sunnyside Daycare into a pyramid and placed himself on the top, he and Twitch (and likely Chunk as well) start to doubt Lotso's leadership as both of them look at each other. Both of them are also in shock when Lotso shows his true colors and pokes Big Baby angrily in the stomach. They also witness Big Baby who retaliates by throwing Lotso into the dumpster, and he and the rest of his fellow henchmen let Andy's toys escape. In the end, he and the rest of Lotso's former henchmen reform for the better and become nicer.
Sparks has only one line, when he points out Chunk's low intelligence, he says, "Neither are you, Chunk" after Chunk gives his opinion on Buzz.


==== Chatter Telephone ====
Voiced by:
Teddy Newton
Chatter Telephone is a toy based on itself. He can only speak when his receiver is lifted from its cradle. He lives in the Caterpillar Room. He is the oldest toy at Sunnyside, and becomes an ally to Woody. When Woody returns to Sunnyside, he immediately says that coming back was a mistake because Lotso had rigged his security after he left and that the best action would be to just lay low. He reluctantly gives him instructions on how to escape Sunnyside. For this, he is later brutally beaten and broken for helping Woody and his group escape, and eventually rats Woody out when convinced that Woody and the other toys had already escaped, but are caught just before they can do so. He sadly apologizes to Woody who fortunately shows sympathy for the broken toy. In the credits, he has been repaired and now lives a happier life there at Sunnyside Daycare without Lotso, having been invited into the Butterfly Room. When Woody talked to him, he called him Ol' Timer.


==== Bookworm ====
Voiced by:
Richard Kind
The Bookworm is a green toy worm with a built-in flashlight who wears glasses. He is a genius who loves reading books. He keeps a library of instruction manuals in a closet at Sunnyside, and gives Lotso the instruction manual for Buzz Lightyear. He later gives the same manual to Barbie (who he thinks is Ken since she is disguised in his spacesuit outfit). In the credits, he is happy without Lotso, and is seen using his flashlight to light a disco ball during a party at Sunnyside. He is based on the Glo Worm toys from the 1980s. He only has two lines in the film.


==== Cymbal-banging monkey ====
The Cymbal banging monkey is a monkey toy based on the Musical Jolly Chimp toy from the 1960s. It monitors the Sunnyside Daycare security cameras at night, and can alert Lotso and the gang of any toys attempting to escape by screeching into a microphone to broadcast over the intercom. Chatter Telephone tells Woody that he must get rid of the monkey before he and his friends can escape. Woody and Slinky manage to succeed in taking it down by wrapping it up in Scotch Tape and shutting it in a filing cabinet. In the credits, it is seen in a much happier situation, gently playing its clash cymbals while wearing star-shaped sunglasses.


=== Toys in other projects ===
The following toy characters were seen in other Toy Story projects:


==== Discarded Fun Meal Toys ====
Appearing in Small Fry, the Discarded Fun Meal Toys are toys that were discarded by children and have formed a support group in a storage room at Poultry Place. Buzz Lightyear came across them at the time when he was replaced by the Fun Meal Toy version of Buzz. Among the Fun Meal Toys are:
Queen Neptuna (voiced by Jane Lynch) — Queen Neptuna is a mermaid toy who is leader of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. She was from the "Mermaid Battle Squadron" line where the Mermaid Battle Squadron's duties are to protect the oceans from pollution and exploitation.
T-Bone (voiced by Angus McLane) — T-Bone is a steak-like Transformer who is Queen Neptuna's second-in-command of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He was from the "Steak Force" line where they fight the Vegetenarians.
DJ Blu-Jay (voiced by Bret Parker) — DJ Blu-Jay is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a small Blue Jay toy wearing a set of headphones with a discoplayer with a tree trunk to stand it up.
Lizard Wizard (voiced by Josh Cooley) — Lizard Wizard is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a small lime green lizard toy with a beard, a violet wizard hat. and a wizard robe.
Bozu the Ninja Clown — Bozu is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a circus clown by day, 15th century ninja from Feudal Japan by night.
Vlad the Engineer (voiced by Jess Harnell in a Transylvanian accent) — Vlad the Engineer is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. Vlad is a vampire in a conductor's hat that rides in a purple steam engine. Vlad got discarded because "nobody wanted to board the Vampire Express."
Gary Grappling Hook (voiced by Angus McLane) — Gary Grappling Hook is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a green toy gun with hands and legs and a blue grappling hook for a face. Buzz uses him to escape the toy psychotherapy meeting when he was paired up with Lizard Wizard.
Tae-Kwon Doe (voiced by Lori Alan) — Tae-Kwan Doe is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. She is an anthropomorphic karate deer toy that can chop through the boards that are part of her toy. At one point, Queen Neptuna sees her hand up and thinks she is raising her hand. When Neptuna calls on her, Tae-Kwon Doe explains that that it's simply her play feature at which point her left hoof goes down hitting the plastic boards and "breaking" it. Her name is a play on "Taekwondo".
Super Pirate (voiced by Angus McLane) — Super Pirate is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a pirate-themed superhero with an eyepatch on his left eye and a peg leg in place of the lower part of the left leg.
Beef Stewardess — Beef Stewardess is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. She is an anthropomorphic cow that is dressed as a stewardess.
Nervous Sys-Tim (voiced by Kitt Hiraski) — Nervous Sys-Tim is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a clear plastic human that shows many body parts such as the brain, the eyes, and the nervous system. Nervous Sys-Tim mentioned that nobody wanted him because he is an accurate depiction of the human nervous system and that would seem gross when kids were eating.
Ghost Burger (voiced by Jason Topolski) — Ghost Burger is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a normal hamburger dressed in a ghost sheet.
Koala Kopter (voiced by Carlos Alazraqui in an Australian accent) — Koala Kopter is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a plastic koala on a helicopter that has a propeller on the top of his hat that is part of the "Down Undermals" set. Koala Kopter stated that he was switched out for a Kangaroo Kanoe.
Roxy Boxy (voiced by Emily Forbes) — Roxy Boxy is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. She is a boxing-themed turtle. Roxy Boxy mentioned that she was recalled because her boxing glove hands will come out and could hurt kids. This has happened during the meeting where it hit Lizard Wizard twice.
Recycle Ben (voiced by Peter Sohn) — Recycle Ben is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a blue recycling bin with arms. Recycle Ben claimed that "he was recycled."
Funky Monk (voiced by Angus McLane) — Funky Monk is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a monk with sunglasses and a gold chain with his initials around his neck.
Condorman (voiced by Bob Bergen) — Condorman is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a condor-themed superhero in his vehicle. Condorman is an allusion to the live-action 1981 Disney film of the same name.
Franklin (voiced by Jim Ward) — Franklin is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a bald eagle sitting on a rolled-up version of the constitution that supports a feather pen on the back of it and the wheels are made up of quarters. Franklin didn't understand why kids disliked him because "he is history, but on wheels."
Pizza-Bot (voiced by Jason Topolski) — Pizza-Bot is a member of the Discarded Fun Meal Toys. He is a blue pizza box-headed robot whose right hand holds a pizza and his left hand is a pizza cutter. It reads PIZZABOT5000 on his chest. His chest is possibly a pizza-carrying chest, such as the ones that you see when someone brings you pizza or the boxes that carry the pizzas at baseball games. Kids do not like Pizza-Bot for some reason which makes him sad.


== Non-Toy characters ==


=== Humans ===


==== Andy Davis ====
Voiced by:
John Morris—Toy Story, Toy Story 2, Toy Story 3
Charlie Bright—Toy Story 3 (as a child)
Andy Davis is the former owner of Woody, Buzz and the other toys in each of the three films. He lived with his mother and sister Molly, but left to go to college when he was 17. However, his father is never seen or mentioned in the films and supplementary materials indicate that his parents may have divorced, or Andy's father may have either died or simply left the family. Toy Story 2 implies that Woody might be a hand-me-down toy, and when introducing the 2009 set of Toy Story collectibles, John Lasseter said "We always imagined he was a hand-me-down to Andy from his father."
In Toy Story, Andy receives a Buzz Lightyear action figure for his 6th birthday party (which was moved earlier due to the impending move). Tension erupts between Buzz and Woody, who has always prided himself on being Andy's favorite. Andy initially spends much more time with his new toy, but still has a special place in his heart for Woody. Thus, he becomes concerned when both toys go missing for a time, fearing they would be lost during his family's move to a new house.
In Toy Story 2, Andy is only seen in the beginning and for a short while in the ending. During his appearances, it is clear that he still loves his toys very much. At the end of the film, Andy is pleased to have five new toys – Jessie, Bullseye, and the three Squeeze Toy Aliens – added into his collection. He marks them, as he has all his toys, with his name on the soles of their feet, or in Bullseye's case, one letter of his name on each hoof.
In Toy Story 3, Andy is 17 and preparing to go off to college, intending to put most of his toys in the attic except for Woody, whom he initially plans to take with him. While he apparently hasn't played with his toys for some years and has given many of them away, he is still resistant to his mother's suggestion to either donate or sell his remaining toys, referring to them as "junk" (which the toys believe is what he truly thinks). When they go missing, however, he becomes upset and confused when he can't find them. Before he goes to college, Woody secretly puts the address of Bonnie (the young daughter of a family friend) on the box with the toys in it, causing Andy to come around to the idea of donating them. He passes them on to young Bonnie, who he realizes will look after his childhood playthings and gives them each their own introduction, stating the qualities that make each of them special. When Bonnie finds Woody in the box as well, Andy shows great reluctance to pass on his favorite toy, but ultimately relents, allowing the toys to stay together in an environment where they'll be loved and played with. He spends a while playing with Bonnie and the toys one last time before departing for college, and is noticeably sad when Bonnie has Woody "wave" to him. He then responds with a quiet "Thanks, guys". This is presumed to be Andy's final appearance in the Toy Story franchise.
According to Toy Story producer Ralph Guggenheim in a December 1995 Animation Magazine article: John Lasseter and the story team for Toy Story reviewed the names of Pixar employees' children looking for the right name for Woody's owner. Davis was ultimately named after and based on Andy Luckey, the son of legendary animator Bud Luckey, Pixar's fifth employee and the creator of Woody. Luckey has declined to publicly comment on the connection.
In the DVD feature for Toy Story 3 on the voice cast, the Pixar crew remark that they weren't sure if Morris would want to do it or would sound right, and were ecstatic when they realized his voice was perfect for a young adult Andy.


==== Bonnie Anderson ====
Voiced by:
Emily Hahn
Bonnie Anderson appears in Toy Story 3 as one of the kids who goes to Sunnyside Daycare, and is the second/current owner of Woody, Buzz and the other toys. Her mother works in the front desk. Although she has an active imagination and boisterous manner when playing with her toys, she is shy and withdrawn when she is around adults, but she quickly warms up to Andy when he donates his toys to her. She finds Woody, who was trying to escape Sunnyside, takes him home, and plays with him. Woody is impressed by what he sees at her house and ultimately gets himself (and all of Andy's other toys) donated to her. Andy briefly plays with her after handing over his toys, and tells her he needs someone "very special" to take care of them for him.
In the short film Hawaiian Vacation, Bonnie goes on a vacation to Hawaii and leaves Barbie and Ken in her room.


==== Molly Davis ====
Voiced by:
Hannah Unkrich—Toy Story, Toy Story 2
Beatrice Miller—Toy Story 3
Molly Davis is Andy's younger sister, seen as an infant in the first film, a toddler in the second film, and as a preteen in the third film. Andy uses her crib as the town jail during playtime at the beginning of the first film, implying they are sharing a room. When the family moves later in the film, Andy and Molly get separate rooms, though Molly has plans to move into Andy's presumably larger room once he leaves for college. One of her first acts in the film series is to traumatize Mr. Potato Head, slobbering on him and throwing him from the crib and causing his parts to scatter, earning her the nickname "Princess Drool" from him. At the end of the first film, she receives a Mrs. Potato Head toy for Christmas, which becomes the wife for Mr. Potato Head in the next two films. Woody's love interest Bo Peep might also be her toy. As seen in Toy Story 3, she also owned a Barbie doll, which she donates to the daycare center as she was less interested in toys by that time (echoing Jessie's description of the changes she witnessed to her owner Emily in the second film).


==== Ms. Davis ====
Voiced by:
Laurie Metcalf
Ms. Davis (Her first name is never mentioned in the films) is Andy and Molly's mother. In the first film, she has brown hair and ties it in a ponytail. In the other two films, her physical appearance is noticeably different and instead of brown, she has blonde hair and leaves it down. Though presented as a loving mother to Andy and Molly, Ms. Davis is actually a major (though indirect) threat to the toys, as she frequently asks Andy to throw out the toys he no longer wants. Ms. Davis' actions regarding the toys sets the plot in motion in all three films, though they are not really malicious. In the first film, she purchases a Buzz Lightyear toy for Andy on his birthday, prompting the rivalry between Buzz and Woody which leads to them being lost and forced to find their way home. In the second film, she puts Wheezy up for sale at a yard sale (due to a broken squeaker Wheezy has got), prompting Woody's rescue attempt where he is subsequently stolen by Al. In the third film, she orders Andy to clean out his room before going to college and mistakenly throws away the bag of toys Andy was putting in the attic, causing them to be donated to a daycare center. Despite this, in the second film, she is overly protective of Woody, describing him as an old family toy. At the end of the third film, she breaks down and weeps at the departure of her first son, but Andy reassures her that she will always be with him even if they are apart. This moment between mother and son plays a major factor in Woody deciding to have Andy donate his toys to Bonnie, thus giving them a new lease on their lives.
Some recent articles explore the possibility that Ms. Davis is Jessie's original owner, Emily. The evidence cited references the flashbacks of Jessie and Emily from Toy Story 2. The flashback sequence shows Emily as a child in the 60's, which is when Ms. Davis would have been a child. The sequence also shows that the cowboy hat that Emily had is very similar to Andy's hat but with an additional white lace area.


==== Sid Phillips ====
Voiced by:
Erik von Detten
Sid Phillips is the main antagonist of the first film. He is Andy's neighbor until Andy moves, but it is not made clear whether he and Andy are friends, enemies, or know each other at all. Sid is known to destroy and torture toys. Many of his toys are either destroyed, have pieces missing, or replaced with other toy parts. He is also shown scaring his sister and destroying her toys by various methods, including exploding, burning, and decapitating them. He also enjoys skateboarding, and his shirt bears the logo of Zero Skateboards. The toys mention that he is consistently kicked out of summer camp; and in the audio commentary on the tenth anniversary DVD, the directors mention that he is a bully but also the "most creative character in the movie". It is also implied that he doesn't have the best home life. His parents don't make any major appearances: his mother's voice is occasionally heard, and his father is only glimpsed briefly asleep in a chair with the TV on.
He seems to be the only human depicted in the film to have witnessed toys actually come to life. At the end of the first film, Woody and Sid's mutant toys decide to rescue Buzz by scaring Sid, which causes him to become very frightened of toys. The last straw is Woody coming alive and telling him to take good care of his toys or else. This causes Sid to panic and run back into his house, and then to his room when his sister scares him with her toy doll.
Sid does not appear in the second film, but is mentioned once by Buzz during the toys' mission to rescue Woody from Al McWhiggin. Sid also appears in the four-issue Monsters, Inc. comic mini-series produced by Boom! Comics.
In the third film, an adult Sid makes a brief appearance as a garbageman with a small beard, recognizable by his characteristic T-shirt. His only lines of dialogue in this role involve humming guitar riffs, and he is depicted listening to heavy metal through a pair of large headphones.


==== Hannah Phillips ====
Voiced by:
Sarah Freeman
Hannah Phillips is Sid's sweet-natured, younger sister who appears a few times in the first film. In Toy Story, Hannah has gotten used to having her toys mutilated by Sid. Most of her dolls have different heads or altered body parts, and at the end of the film she finds typical sibling enjoyment in scaring her brother after he has been horrified by Woody and the other toys. She spends most of the time during the movie playing with her altered dolls. She calls Buzz "Mrs. Nesbit."


==== Al McWhiggin ====
Voiced by:
Wayne Knight
Al (called Al McWhiggin on his desk nameplate, The Chicken Man by Andy's toys, and Poultry Man by Utility Belt Buzz) is an owner of a chain of local toy stores and also an obsessive collector of all things related to the old "Woody's Round-up" TV series. He is currently one of the main antagonists of Toy Story 2. Al shoplifts Woody from a yard sale Andy's mom holds in hope of selling him to a Japanese toy museum. Al is unscrupulously obsessive, overweight, very impatient and lazy (he complains of having to "drive all the way to work on a Saturday", even though his apartment is across the street from the store.); he is partially inspired by his voice actor Wayne Knight (during the production of Toy Story 2, Knight had a goatee at the time like Al in the movie). Cartoonist and animator Scott Shaw has also been acknowledged as another model and inspiration for Al.
Al is the owner of a large toy store called "Al's Toy Barn". The store is first seen during the first Toy Story on an advertisement of Buzz Lightyear toys, but Al did not appear. He is first seen in Toy Story 2 during an advertisement on TV in which he dresses in a chicken suit, of which Hamm, after turning off the TV, remarks: "I despise that chicken". Later, he is seen trying to buy Woody at a yard sale held by Andy's mom. After Andy's mom refuses to hand over the doll and locks Woody in a box, Al steals Woody, intending to sell him, along with the rest of his collection of Woody's Roundup toys and memorabilia, to a toy museum in Japan for a large sum of money.
However, just as Al's plane is about to fly off to Japan with the Roundup Gang packed in luggage, Andy's toys, led by Buzz, are able to save Woody, along with Jessie and Bullseye; meanwhile the Prospector is placed in a mischievous girl's backpack for his betrayal. During his latest commercial, Al is unable to control himself from sobbing hysterically over his losses as a result, Hamm responded to it by saying "Well, I guess crime doesn't pay."
Even over a decade after the second film, Al has not given up on his obsession on Woody's Roundup; he is the online bidder who buys Woody for $2,000, and then Jessie during the events of Toy Story of Terror. As fate would have it, Al would once again fail to attain Woody and Jessie as they are soon able to free each other.
Al's last name was revealed on the nameplate on his office desk; also, when he is done taking pictures, he answers his cellphone and Mr. Konishi can be heard saying his full name. According to Disney Adventures magazine, Al wasn't allowed to play with his toys when he was a boy, leading to his toy-collecting niche. It is implied that Al's full name is Carl McWhiggin since that Mr. Konishi is heard calling him that on the phone.
His car's license plate reads LZTYBRN, which is "Al's Toy Barn" minus the vowel letters. It is also the actual license plate of Ash Brannon, co-director of Toy Story 2, according to the Toy Story 2: Special Edition commentary.
Al's car resembles Flo from Cars.


==== Geri the Cleaner ====
Voiced by:
Jonathan Harris
Geri, an elderly specialist in toy restoration and repair with a fully loaded toy repair kit, comes to Al's apartment in Toy Story 2 to fix Woody up in preparation for his trip to Japan. He insists that Al let him take his time with the work and views it as more than a simple job, asserting, "You can't rush art." A scene which has reference to the Marathon Man dentist scene.
Geri's character model was reused from a previous Pixar short, Geri's Game, where he plays a chess game against himself. In this short, he is voiced by Bob Peterson.


==== Emily ====
Emily was the name of Jessie's former owner and is mentioned by her in the second film. She appears in a flashback musical sequence while "When She Loved Me" by Sarah McLachlan is played. During this sequence, Jessie tells Woody of her first experience with an owner who was Emily and why she resented being a child's toy. As a young child she was a fan of the Wild West and horses, along with the Woody's Roundup TV show, apparent through her love of Jessie. As she became a teenager, her interest began to shift towards makeup and gossip with her friends which lead to Jessie being neglected then thrown away through a donation box. She is mentioned by Jessie for the second time in the third film, when she fears of being thrown away by Andy, saying "I should've seen this coming! It's Emily all over again!".


==== Daisy ====
Daisy is a little girl who appears in flashbacks in Toy Story 3. She owned Lotso, Big Baby and Chuckles in the beginning, but accidentally left them behind at a rest area along the road. In order to pacify her, rather than finding Lotso and the rest of her toys, Daisy's parents instead bought her another Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear, which made Lotso think he had been replaced and forgotten about, and changed him into a sinister, ruthless toy.


==== Ron ====
Voiced by:
Stephen Tobolowsky
Ron is the greedy manager of the Sleep Well Motel, appearing in Toy Story of Terror. He has a habit of stealing toys from customers in his motel and selling them on the Internet, with the help from his pet iguana, Mr. Jones. When Bonnie and her mother went to Sleep Well after their car got a flat tire, Mr. Jones steals a number of Bonnie's toys, including Woody, Buzz, and Jessie. Ron then takes pictures of the toys and puts them on his bidding sale, awaiting buyers. Fortunately, Jessie manages to trick Mr. Jones into tearing off the curtain, revealing the toys' location and Ron's scheme to Bonnie and her mother, who then calls the police.
Two police officers later arrive to question Ron, who attempts to escape by stealing their car but is forced to flee on foot after immediately crashing it into the motel sign. The police officers initiate a manhunt for him.


=== Animals ===


==== Scud ====
Scud is Sid's vicious Bull Terrier and secondary antagonist of the first film. His viciousness is first demonstrated when Sid sets a Squeeze Toy Alien on his nose and commands him to maul it mercilessly. Scud serves as an obstacle for Woody and Buzz as they try to escape Sid's house. First, as Woody tries to run off when Sid leaves the bedroom door open he encounters Scud sleeping and accidentally wakes him, forcing him and Buzz to hide. When Sid takes Buzz to the backyard to blow him up with a rocket, Woody tries to save him but Scud traps him in Sid's room. The mutant toys help Woody distract Scud so they can rescue Buzz. Scud later spots Woody and Buzz trying to escape on the moving van and pursues them, but is eluded when he runs after them into the middle of a traffic intersection and is trapped by the cars as they crash while trying to avoid him.


==== Buster ====
Buster is Andy's pet Dachshund, whom he receives at the end of Toy Story and he also appears in Toy Story 2 and Toy Story 3.
Voiced by:
Frank Welker
In Toy Story 2, he is always full of energy, super hyper and overall a great dog. Buster is considered to be nice to the toys in Andy's room and is the only one in Andy's house who knows that the toy are alive, and is fiercely loyal to Woody, obeying all commands given to him by Woody: when Wheezy is taken by Andy's mom to be sold at a yard sale, Woody is able to command Buster to carry him down to the yard sale so he can rescue Wheezy. However, he pretends to not respond to commands from Andy whatsoever. Slinky is also able to communicate with him due to the fact they're both dogs. At the beginning of Toy Story 2, Buster finds Woody in a record of 13.5 seconds. After the toys return home, Jessie helps Buster out of the room when he needs to go out for a private time, and he is last seen with Andy and his family as they go out on another drive.
In Toy Story 3, Buster is now older and looks very aged, with mixed brown and gray fur, a gray-white snout, overweight, and too old to help Woody save the other toys (in a direct parody of the rescue scene from Toy Story 2), although he remains nice and loyal to them. He tends to fall asleep as well. He is also briefly seen when Mrs. Potato Head was subsequently visualizing her missing eye, which was in Andy's room. He is last seen with Andy before he departs for college.


==== Crazy Critters ====
Crazy Critters are a bunch of 2-dimensional animal puppets from the Woody's Roundup show including an armadillo, bat, bear, beaver, bird, deer, vulture, bear cub, porcupine, flying squirrel, rabbit, skunk, snake, fox, raccoon, tortoise and bobcat. They come quickly when Jessie calls them, with the tortoise falling slightly behind the others. Woody understands them in the Woody's Roundup show, sometimes so well the animals are shown to be shocked. The Crazy Critters make cameo appearances as prizes determined by the score of players in Toy Story Midway Mania!, and in the Toy Story 2 video game on the Nintendo 64.


==== Mr. Jones ====
Voiced by:
Dee Bradley Baker
Mr. Jones is an iguana appearing in "Toy Story of Terror!," owned by the manager of Sleep Well Motel, Ron. He is loyal to his master and is trained to secretly steal toys from customers so that his master can sell the toys off the Internet. During the majority of the special, he is seen snatching most of Bonnie's toys away in a flash through the air shafts and ventilation systems. Eventually, he accidentally swallowed Mr. Potato Head's left arm and Combat Carl's right hand. However, he is forced to regurgitate them out after Jessie tricks him into ripping off the curtain, revealing Ron's scheme to Bonnie and her mother. It is unknown what happened to Mr. Jones following his master's arrest in the end, though it is most likely he will be sent to animal control.


==== Whiskers ====
Whiskers is the neighborhood cat from the first film. He/she is occupying one of the bushes in Andy's yard as the toys scan for Buzz with a flashlight. As Rex sees the bush shake, he initially thinks it's Buzz, but is annoyed upon finding out it was Whiskers instead. The cat does not appear onscreen, but its yowl is heard.


== References ==