Wiper Democratic Movement–Kenya (WDM-K) refers to a political party in Kenya, which originated as a result of the 2005 Kenyan constitutional referendum. It grew out of the Orange Democratic Movement Party of Kenya (ODM).
It is headed by Kalonzo Musyoka, who ran for president in 2007 and served as the vice-president in the Grand Coalition of Mwai Kibaki and Raila Odinga. It is now a member of the main opposition Coalition for Reforms and Democracy.


== 2007 elections ==

The present Wiper Democratic Movement was created out of a split between Kalonzo Musyoka and Raila Odinga in mid-August 2007. Raila's group, which also included Musalia Mudavadi, William Ruto, Joseph Nyagah and Najib Balala bought out the original ODM party from Mugambi Imanyara, while Kalonzo's group, consisting of himself and Dr. Julia Ojiambo remained in the shell of the party then called ODM-Kenya. The two factions held their elections for presidential candidate on consecutive days at the Kasarani sports complex in Nairobi. On 31 August 2007, Kalonzo Musyoka defeated Julia Ojiambo for the ODM–Kenya ticket. On September 1 Raila Odinga was selected the ODM presidential candidate. Raila and Kalonzo faced president Kibaki in the general election. Kalonzo took a distant third place, but in January 2008 he became vice-president of Kenya under Kibaki, whose victory was disputed by Raila Odinga and the ODM. Following the 2007-2008 Kenyan crisis,which resulted in a great loss of life, a government of national unity was formed between Kibaki's PNU and Odinga's ODM, with Musyoka retaining his position as vice-president. So far, Musyoka is one of two Wiper Democratic Movement politicians in the cabinet, with Mutula Kilonzo as Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, as his faction received very little support in the parliamentary election.


== Political Parties Act ==
In December 2008 Wiper Democratic Movement held party elections to comply with the recently passed Political Parties Act.


== 2013 General Elections ==
In mid-2011 the party changed its colours and symbol in order to differentiate itself from Raila Odinga's ODM party and was believed to be a central cog in a proposed political alliance intended to present a unified front against Raila in the 2013 general elections. However in December 2012 it became one of three political parties, the others being FORD-Kenya & Orange Democratic Movement to support Odinga's soon-to-be-doomed presidential ambitions.


== References ==


== External links ==
2007 Manifesto
2007 Parliamentary Candidates