Evacuate the Dancefloor is the third studio album from German eurodance group Cascada, consisting of DJ Manian, Natalie Horler, and Yanou, first released on July 3, 2009. Recording sessions for the album took place during 2008 to 2009 at Plazmatek Studio, Yanou Studio 1. The entire album, like their previous albums, was produced by the two disc jockeys from Cascada, Yanou and DJ Manian. The album’s genre shifts away from the uptempo eurodance music the group is well noted for and moves toward a more mainstream electropop sound while drawing influences of urban contemporary and pop music. Musically, the album is composed of dance tracks with thick euro synths, cymbal crashing beats and europop lyrics. Lyrically, the album is composed of songs about love, dancing and relationships.
Critical reception of the album overall has been positive, with many critics praising the new sound and lyrics. There was a total of three singles released from the album. "Evacuate the Dancefloor" was the lead single from the album, first released on June 29, 2009. It peaked in the top five in over twelve countries, including The Netherlands and the United Kingdom where they peaked at number one. Fever was released internationally as the second single, and as the third in the United Kingdom. It failed to match the success of its predecessor, barely cracking to top forty in seven countries. "Dangerous" was released on October 12, 2009 as the final single from the album and as the second single in the United Kingdom. It peaked in the top ten in Slovakia and Finland while elsewhere it failed to crack the top fifty.


== Background ==
With the release of their first single, "Evacuate the Dancefloor", people heard their sound change toward modern electropop and contemporary R&B. Cascada's lead singer Natalie Horler explained that "You do evolve and progress and we're very proud of what's come of it." trying to distance themselves from Lady Gaga's electropop sound. Previews of the album began to appear on YouTube on June 23, 2009. The lead single, "Evacuate the Dancefloor", features a variety of synthesizers. Different basslines and new instrument sounds contrast to the traditional style of Cascada of which was the only styling used in previous songs.
"Fever" for instance features a standard dance music beat with electropop synths, also similar to the house genre of Benny Benassi and David Guetta, and is also the only song on the albums that contains profanity. "Ready Or Not" is a monumental throbathon that's a throwback to the cheesy floor-fillers of the 90s eurodance. "Hold On", "Dangerous" and "Everytime I Hear Your Name" are classy eurodance anthems with pulsating beats, swirling synths and vocoder effects. "Breathless" mimics Kelly Clarkson's pop-rock sound with pulsating synths and the drum beats of "Evacuate the Dancefloor" and "Hold Your Hands Up" holds similar qualities to Natasha Bedingfield's music.


== Critical reception ==
Evacuate the Dancefloor received generally positive reviews. Billboard Magazine was in favor of the album claiming "it repeats that single's formula: combining Horler's teen-bop vocals with a walloping, turbo-charged kick drum that could fit in a warehouse rave. They favored songs like "Everytime I Hear Your Name", "What About Me", "Ready or Not" and "Fever". Digital Spy found the album altogether bleak stating "Horler shows all the conviction of a session singer trilling her way through a demo while her mind focuses in on the pay cheque". CD Kritik reviews were in favor of the album saying "it offers no surprises, but impresses with its lush pop production." "All of the following numbers are consistently danceable and genuine bad-mood-killer." "The producers have done the best job. By listening to [Horler's] desire for perfection, the songs are structured and powerfully made." David Jeffries of Allmusic favored the album, saying "Less dreamy and more thumping, the sound here isn't that far from Lady GaGa or Katy Perry's material, but with lyrics that are generally positive and lead singer Natalie Horler remaining effervescent as ever, fans will immediately be able to identify these tracks as the floor-filling act they love." HMV: Although the album comprises different genres of music compared to the previous albums 'Everytime We Touch' and 'Perfect Day' including House and R&B, it does promise fans that the "usual" Cascada anthems undertone is still present in full force. According to Canadian magazine YouThink, the album "captures a whole new audience and captivates the dance nation." They praised 'Fever' and favored 'Everytime I Hear Your Name'.


== Singles ==
"Evacuate the Dancefloor"
"Evacuate the Dancefloor" was released as the album's first single commercially in Ireland on June 15, 2009 and in the United Kingdom on June 29, 2009 by All Around the World. On July 5, 2009 it debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart. The song has also peaked at number two in Ireland and New Zealand. The song was released by Cascada's American record label Robbins Entertainment on July 21, 2009.
"Fever"
"Fever" was the album's second single, released in Germany on October 9, 2009, with further releases in the Netherlands, Australia, New Zealand and the United States. The song served as the third single from the album in the United Kingdom (following "Dangerous", which became the second single there). It reached the top-forty in various countries, with a peak of number 31 in Germany, 32 in New Zealand, 24 in the Netherlands and 38 in Austria and entered the top 10 in France.
"Dangerous"
"Dangerous" was the third single released in the UK and Ireland on October 12th, 2009; it peaked at number 67 in the United Kingdom & number 9 in the UK dance charts.


== Promotion ==
On May 28, an album launch party was held in London, where Natalie Horler performed the "Evacuate the Dancefloor" and along with "Breathless", "Draw the Line" and "Dangerous". "Dangerous" has the typical hands-up "Cascada style", while "Breathless" has a style more similar to that of Kelly Clarkson, and "Draw the Line" is a ballad. Horler will also make appearances in nightclubs across the globe in the next coming months. All appearances will help promote the release of the album Evacuate the Dancefloor. During interviews Horler had stated that her favourite tracks from the album include "Draw The Line", "Breathless", "Fever", "Dangerous" and "Why You Had To Leave".
Cascada also performed for one night on Britney Spears' The Circus Starring Britney Spears Tour.


== Track listing ==
Yann Peifer and Manuel Reuter co-wrote every song with the exception of track 2. Other writers are listed below.


== Personnel ==
Frank T. Wartenberg – photography
Frank Ehrlich – international management
Joe Yannece – mastering
King & White – production, arrangement, mixing
Manuel Reuter – production, arrangement, mixing
Natalie Horler – vocals
Rebecca Meek – design
Yann Peifer – production, arrangement, mixing
Allan Eshuijs – songwriting
James Kinnear – songwriting
Jonathan Kinnear – songwriting


== Charts ==


== Release history ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Cascada Site