Modupe Ozolua is a social Entrepreneur and Philanthropist. She is the Chief Executive Officer of Body Enhancement limited in Nigeria. Body Enhancement Ltd pioneered cosmetic surgery in Nigeria in 2001 and aesthetic lasers in 2007. She is also the founder and president of Body Enhancement Annual Reconstructive Surgery (BEARS) Foundation. From cosmetic surgery procedures, Modupe Ozolua now gives hope to the less privileged.


== Early life and education ==
Modupe Ozien Ozolua is a Princess from the Benin Kingdom. She was born in Benin City, Nigeria October 10, 1973, the youngest of four siblings born to Mr and Mrs M.S Ozolua. Her parents hail from Sabongida Ora area of Edo State. Her name, Modupe, means "I praise or thank God" in Yoruba. Ozolua had her early education in Nigeria, where she attended University of Benin primary and secondary school, and Queen Idia Girls College in Benin City. Her secondary education was completed at Apata Memorial High School, Isolo, Lagos. To further her education, Ozolua left for the United States of America in 1989. She studied in Southwestern College, San Diego (California), and Devry International University, Los Angeles, California (1989–1995). She was recognised in the 1994-1995 edition of the NATIONAL DEANS’S LIST. Modupe Ozolua has a dual citizenship of Nigeria and America.


== Her Interests and Life style ==
Ozolua is a Christian and a single mother.


== Career ==
Ozolua is a businesswoman and philanthropist; she started earning money "at the age 18, by working in McDonalds’ in America while in college, 1991" (Olatunji, 2006). The first business Ozolua had was a communication business in Los Angeles prior to pioneering cosmetic surgery to West Africa at the age of 27.


== Awards ==
Miss Ozolua describes herself in her interview with Adeseun (2004)  as a "workaholic" –to which one might add; intelligent and an ambitious woman. Ozolua has been recognised by the public through her following awards: • Nigeria Women Awards. • Dame International for Pioneering Action Award 2003. • City People for Female Achiever in the Beauty sector 2001. • Moremi Hall Executive Council • Oba Femi Awolowo University for Award of Excellence 2002. • City People for Beautician of the Year 2001. Likewise, Ozolua has been featured on CNN, BBC and many other international media publications. In Africa, in numerous magazines and press publications.
The aim of Ozolua’s charity organization, BEARS Foundation, is to treat individuals [children, adults, and people who have serious injuries like acid burn and severe accidents] with deformities and create HIV/AIDS awareness. Archbishop Desmond Tutu is the Patron of BEARS Foundation.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Official website".