An intertrigo is an inflammation (rash) of the body folds (adjacent areas of skin).
The term "intertrigo" commonly refers to a bacterial, fungal, or viral infection that has developed at the site of broken skin due to such inflammation. A frequent manifestation is candidal intertrigo.
An intertrigo usually develops from the chafing of warm, moist skin in the areas of the inner thighs and genitalia, the armpits, under the breasts, the underside of the belly, behind the ears, and the web spaces between the toes and fingers. An intertrigo usually appears red and raw-looking, and may also itch, ooze, and be sore. Intertrigos occur more often among overweight individuals, those with diabetes, those restricted to bed rest or diaper use, and those who use medical devices, like artificial limbs, that trap moisture against the skin. Also, there are several skin diseases that can cause an intertrigo to develop, such as dermatitis or inverse psoriasis.


== TreatmentsEdit ==

Intertrigo is treated by addressing associated infections, by removing moisture from the site, and by using substances at the site to help maintain skin integrity. If the individual is overweight, losing weight may also help. Relapses of intertrigo are common, and require periodic care from a dermatologist.
Keeping the area of the intertrigo dry and exposed to the air can help prevent recurrences, as can removing moisture from the area using absorbent fabrics or body powders, including plain cornstarch and judiciously used antiperspirants.
Barrier ointments, such as a topical zinc oxide cream, are commonly sold as diaper rash treatments. Some commonly available over the counter brand names include Sudocrem, Desitin, and Balmex. Anti-fungal creams, most commonly clotrimazole 1%, may also be used in conjunction with a barrier ointment. Hydrocortisone ointment is beneficial in relieving the pain and symptoms of the infection but is not curative.
Fungal infections associated with intertrigo may be treated with prescription antifungals, including fluconazole, griseofulvin, and nystatin.
Intertrigo is also a known symptom of vitamin B6 deficiency.


== See alsoEdit ==
Diaper rash
List of skin diseases


== External linksEdit ==
A.O.C.D.: Intertrigo
eMedicine: Intertrigo (by Samuel Selden, M.D.)
DERMAdoctor: Intertrigo (by Audrey Kunin, M.D.)