December (/dɨˈsɛmbər/ di-SEM-bər) is the twelfth and last month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars. It is one of seven months with the length of 31 days.
December is the first month of meteorological winter in the Northern Hemisphere and in the Southern Hemisphere is the first month of summer. December is the month with the shortest daylight hours of the year in the Northern Hemisphere and the longest daylight hours of the year in the Southern Hemisphere.
December starts on the same day of the week as September every year and ends on the same day of the week as April every year. In common years, April and July of the previous year start on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a common year and October of the previous year always starts on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a leap year while January of the previous years starts on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a leap year and a year immediately after that. July of the previous year ends on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a common year, February and October of the previous year end on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a leap year, and January of the previous year ends on the same day of the week as December of the current year as a leap year and a year immediately before that. December starts on the same day of the week as June of the following year in years immediately before common years and March and November of the following year in years immediately before leap years. December ends on the same day of the week as September of the following year in years immediately before common years and March and June of the following year in years immediately before leap years.


== History ==

December gets its name from the Latin word decem (meaning ten) because it was originally the tenth month of the year in the Roman calendar, which began in March. The winter days following December were not included as part of any month. Later, the months of January and February were created out of the monthless period and added to the beginning of the calendar, but December retained its name.


== Events in December ==


=== Non-Gregorian Observances ===
Vivaha Panchami 2015 date: December 16
Datta Jayanti 2015 date: December 25
Dhanu Jatra 2015-2016 date: 26 Dec- 06 jan


=== Fixed observances ===

Day of Restoration of Independence of Portugal (December 1)
Union Day of Romania (December 1)
World AIDS Day (December 1)
International Day of People with Disability (December 3)
National Day of United Arab Emirates (December 2)
Navy Day of India (December 4)
Sinterklaas in the Netherlands (December 5)
Father's Day (King's Birthday) in Thailand (December 5)
Hanukkah (December 6 in 2015)
Independence Day in Finland (December 6)
Constitution Day in Spain (December 6)
Saint Nicholas Day in Greece and Switzerland (December 6)
Pearl Harbor Day in the United States (December 7)
Fukuoka Marathon is held on first Sunday in December.
Día de la Madre en Panamá (Mother's Day) in Panama. (December 8)
Day of the Immaculate Conception of Mary. (December 8)
Constitution Day in Romania. (December 8)
In the Ásatrú religion, Egil Skallagrimsson's Day (December 9) is a day of remembrance for the Viking hero.
Nobel Prizes awarded (December 10) on the anniversary of Alfred Nobel's death.
Human Rights Day (December 10)
Día de la Virgen de Guadalupe, or Day of the Virgin of Guadalupe, in Mexico (December 12)
Independence Day (Jamhuri Day) in Kenya (December 12)
Saint Lucy's Day (December 13)
Republic Day in Malta (December 13)
Honolulu Marathon is held on second Sunday in December.
Monkey Day (December 14)
Bill of Rights Day (United States). (December 15)
Zamenhof Day (December 15)
National Day of Kingdom of Bahrain (December 16)
Victory day of Bangladesh (December 16)
Day of Reconciliation in South Africa (December 16).
First day of winter (December 21)
Yaldā (the birth of Mithra), in Iran (December 21)
Solstice (called the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere and the summer solstice in the Southern Hemisphere) occurs on dates varying from December 20 to December 22 (in UTC). See also Yule
Mother's Day in Indonesia (December 22)
The Emperor's Birthday, a national holiday in Japan (December 23)
Festivus (December 23)
HumanLight (Humanist holiday), (December 23)
Christmas Eve (December 24)
Christmas (December 25)
Boxing Day (December 26)
Saint Stephen's Day (December 26)
Day of Goodwill (December 26)
Kwanzaa (December 26 to January 1)
Independence Day in Slovenia - Independence and Unity Day, (December 26)
Proclamation Day in South Australia (December 28)
Philippines – Rizal Day (December 30)
New Year's Eve (December 31)
Yule (December 20 to December 31)


== December symbols ==
Its birth flower is the narcissus.
December's birthstones are the turquoise, zircon, and tanzanite.
The zodiac signs for the month of December are Sagittarius (until December 21) and Capricorn (December 22 onwards).


== References ==


== See also ==
Historical anniversaries
Undecimber