The following is a list of characters from the light novel, manga and anime series, A Certain Magical Index, and its side-story manga and anime series, A Certain Scientific Railgun. The series primarily takes place in Academy City, a city filled with students who strive to become powerful espers, which is brought into conflict by the appearance of magicians.


== Main charactersEdit ==

Tōma Kamijō (上条 当麻, Kamijō Tōma)
Voiced by: Atsushi Abe (Japanese), Micah Solusod (English)
Tōma is the main protagonist of A Certain Magical Index, and an important character in A Certain Scientific Railgun. He tends to stay away from trouble but possesses a strong sense of justice. He is an average student and knowledgeable about certain subjects yet is a failure in his esper studies. While he is an idealist for the hopes of other people, ironically he is cynical about himself possibly because of his powers.
His right hand contains a power called Imagine Breaker (幻想殺し (イマジンブレイカー), Imajin Bureikā, "Illusion/Fantasy Killer"), an ability which negates all supernatural powers but also his own luck ("divine providence" as defined by Index). Because this ability cannot be detected through testing, he has been given the lowest esper rank, Level 0. Due to the nature of his power, the founder of Academy City considers him neither an esper nor a magician, but rather a normal person with a unique ability.
Throughout the series, he tries to live his life normally while still facing against the many adversaries from the worlds of science and magic and the conflicts that follow. Despite his very bad luck, he has managed to get the interests and hearts of many characters that are in love with him, which Aisa jokes about. The reason is not only to his personality, but he avoids the red thread of fate, according to Index.
In order to save Index from the need of a memory reset, he had activated her self-protection system and destroyed the spell responsible for her mind strain. However, he ends up having his memories destroyed when he comes into contact with the Feather of Light (光の羽, Hikari no Hane). Though he no longer remembers the past, he claims his heart has not completely forgotten the people he cares about. His memory loss is kept a secret known only to himself and a few others, including his doctor Heaven Canceller (who unknown to Tōma is Aleister's personal physician), Terra of the Left (who manages to figure it out by himself), Mikoto (who learns about it from accidentally overhearing the conversation between Tōma and Terra), Fiamma of the Right (who, after learning about it, sends this information to Index using the mental link he established with her using John's Pen mode), Index (who finds out from Fiamma), Seria Kumokawa (who realizes it since Tōma isn't "talking" to her the way he should knew), and finally is Misaki Shokuhō (who figures it out when Tōma didn't recognized the nickname she calls him).
One of the series' main mysteries is the origin of Imagine Breaker, since it is neither an esper ability nor a magical ability. Later in the series, whereas Touma's entire right arm is cut off a dragon head referred to as the Dragon Strike (竜王の顎ドラゴンストライク Ryūō no Ago, Doragon Sutoraiku, "Jaw of the Dragon King") emerges. It should be noted that within Christian Church, the dragon represents to be of Divine origin according to two members of God's Right Seat. Fiamma believes Imagine Breaker is the Holy Stone, which holds the power of miracles and Terra hints Imagine Breaker's full powers have yet to be unlocked; if it does, its powers would extend to Tōma's whole body and beyond and the second about the meaning behind his surname 'Kamijō' as it means "The One Superior To God (神上)" for God's Right Seat and "The One Who Cleanses God (神浄)" for Kaori Kanzaki and Aleister.
Due to the troubles he faces with delinquents, Tōma is a skilled street fighter and is physically fit and manages to outrun his opponents. As he faces espers and magicians, he combined his fighting skills including using his powers with his quick thinking to outmaneuver his opponents. Mikoto considers him to be extremely strong, having never beaten him despite having repeatedly challenged him (who before she beat him once during his fight to save Othinus from the entire world after she shocked him directly). However, his ability can only be effective when espers use their power on him directly, which is why he had a tough time against Accelerator, who uses his ability on projectiles.
He also has a sixth sense for incoming magic and esper attacks based on their AIM fields and Telesma flow and uses his powers to minimize the damage taken.
Index (禁書目録 (インデックス), Indekkusu)
Voiced by: Yuka Iguchi (Japanese), Monica Rial (English)
Index Librorum Prohibitorum ("List of Prohibited Books"), is one of the main heroines from the magic side and the titular character of A Certain Magical Index. She is a young nun from Necessarius (必要悪の教会, Hitsuyōaku no Kyōkai, "Church of Necessary Evil"), a branch of the Church of England. Index is small in stature and has a petite build. About 15 years old, she has thigh-length, silvery-blue hair with very white skin and large green eyes. She also wears a white robe with golden embroidery sewed onto every edge of it, the Walking Church, that prevents any injury on her, but it is later destroyed by Tōma when he touched it with his right hand, which is why her uniform is stitched with golden pins. Her mind has been implanted with the 103,000 magical texts of the Index-Librorum-Prohibitorum as she possesses Photographic memory, which makes magicians wonder if she really is human because just one Grimoires is poisonous to the mind, and one is more than enough to kill a person without the proper preparative.
Her sorcery name is Dedicatus545, "The devoted lamb protects the knowledge of the strong" (献身的な子羊は強者の知識を守る, Kenshinteki na Kohitsuji wa Kyōsha no Chishiki o Mamoru). The Church says that the Grimoires take up 85% of her mind, so she only has 15% of memory space left to use in daily activities, which allows her to live normally for less than a year. However, all of this is revealed to be a lie after Tōma begins to question how the Church even got to numbers like 15% and 85% and finds out from his teacher Komoe that the human mind can store an unlimited amount of memories up to 140 years at least. This was purposely done as the Church planned to make the Grimoires harder to access by telling their underlings to perform "maintenance" on her mind in exactly one-year intervals once her memory has come to its "limit"; that way, she will not remember her close friends and accidentally and/or purposely reveal the contents of the Grimoires.
When she is being invaded by outsiders or injured, her self-protection system personality, John's Pen (自動書記 (ヨハネのペン), Yohane no Pen, "Automatic Writing"), will be activated to allow her to use magic to cast high-class magic attacks such as St. George's Sanctuary (聖ジョージの聖域 (セントじょーじのせいいき), Seinto Jōji no Seīki, "Sanctuary of St. George") and Dragon's Breath (竜王の殺息 (ドラゴンブレス), Doragon Buresu, "Killing Breath of the Dragon King"). Her self-protection system will use the Feather of Light (光の羽, Hikari no Hane) to force a reset on Index's own memory should a manual reset fail to be performed. Although she does not know that she has magical powers, she can easily identify the types of magic by seeing it or somebody describing it to her and know how to counter them. Her vast knowledge of the Index-Librorum-Prohibitorum within her mind makes her to be one of the most powerful characters so far and becomes very helpful to her friends in various situations using skills like Spell Intercept (強制詠唱 (スペルインターセプト), Superu Intāseputo, "Force Chant"), and Sheol Fear ((魔滅の声 (シェオールフィア), Sheōru Fia, "Voice of Destruction of Evil").
She is often elated by a variety of things and is slightly ignorant and curious of modern technology. She usually is gentle and polite with people and has a kind nature, but is also a selfish spoiled brat when together with Tōma. She is also abusive towards him and hypocritical in nature, chiding him for doing things she doesn't like, yet does the same things herself. She constantly jumps to conclusions without learning the circumstances first and constantly punishes Toma, wrongfully, by biting him or starting arguments with him, much to his confusion and exasperation. She also has a large appetite and uses any excuse to get food from anyone and likes watching an anime series called Magical Powered Kanamin. She has strong feelings towards Tōma and even confessed her love after hearing Tōma lost his memories because of her; however he avoided answering by changing the theme of the talk since he has no idea about what kind of feelings he used to have with Index.
When she returns to England, she is sought out by Fiamma who wants her knowledge and reactivates John's Pen mode through her remote control spiritual item. Later during her stay at Necessarius Headquarters at St. George Cathedral, she learns the bitter truth about Tōma when Fiamma reveals Tōma lied to her about his memories, which sends her on a rampage and grows angelic "Crimson Wings" and corners Stiyl with ease who tries to restrain her just by flapping her wings. She also has displayed the ability to summon legendary weapons and artifacts to attack, such as the "Sword of Freyr", the magic sword of the Harvest God from the Norse Mythology. After defeating Fiamma, Tōma releases Index's mind from Fiamma's control, apologizes to her, and both promises each other to meet again. At the end of volume 22, she returns to St. George Cathedral with Stiyl to learn what happened to Tōma.
In New Testament, Index eventually reunites with Tōma when he reappears in Academy City after the events of the Third World War.
Mikoto Misaka (御坂 美琴, Misaka Mikoto)
Voiced by: Rina Satō (Japanese), Brittney Karbowski (English)
Mikoto is one of the main heroines from the science side in A Certain Magical Index, as well as the main protagonist and the titular character of A Certain Scientific Railgun. Her parents are Tabigake and Misuzu Misaka, which her father is a prominent businessman and millionaire. Despite her rich background, Mikoto grew up in a normal typical childhood.
At a young age, she was discovered to be a Level 1 Electromaster (電撃使い (エレクトロマスター), Erekutoromasutā, lit. "Electricity User"), espers who have the ability to generate and control electricity, and see beyond the visible electromagnetic spectrum. She enrolled into Academy City to train her powers and worked very hard until her powers were ranked Level 5, the highest esper ranking, with her being the third strongest of the seven espers with this rank. As an electromaster, she can generate and manipulate electricity which she can use to shock opponents, hack into electronics like computer networks and security systems, and use electromagnetism to cling to surfaces or manipulate iron particles into a chain-sword whip. Mikoto's signature move is her ability to shoot metal projectiles such as coins at high destructive speeds, hence her nickname, "Railgun" (超電磁砲 (レールガン), Rērugan, lit. "Super Electromagnetic Cannon"). If she is in a bad mood, she will sometimes let out bursts of electricity describing her emotional stress, usually resulting in power failures or in worse cases, a thunder storm that causes citywide blackouts.
Mikoto attends Tokiwadai Middle School, a famous girls' school for the rich and elite espers and one of the five elite schools of Academy City. To most people, she is considered a proper lady, but in reality, she has a short-tempered, prideful, and improper attitude with some tomboyish tendencies and insecurities, a fact few other characters know. She is fond of cute, childish things, such as flowery pajamas and Gekota, the popular frog mascot franchise. Contrary to what she claims, she has a strong sense of morals and hates injustice. Mikoto has a one-sided rivalry with Tōma, who, even after experiencing permanent amnesia, nicknames her "Biri Biri" (ビリビリ, the Japanese onomatopoeia of electric shocks, "Bugzapper" in the English dub, "Sparky" in the English manga), ever since their first meeting before the events of the first novel when he first dissipated her electricity after he unsuccessfully tried to rescue her. Since that incident, she is always trying to have a proper match with Tōma and defeat him despite his many attempts to avoid conflict with her.
When Mikoto was young, she was tricked into giving the city's scientists her DNA under the pretense of finding the cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy; their actual goal to create military-grade combat clones of her. When it was discovered that the clones did not have the same power level as Mikoto, they were instead used in a project called "Level 6 Shift", intended to make Accelerator the first level 6 esper by having him kill 20,000 clones. The events of how Mikoto tried to stop the project are briefly mentioned in the third novel and expanded upon in the Railgun manga. When all of her attempts failed, she contemplates letting herself be killed by Accelerator, as an unexpected variable to destroy Tree Diagram's calculations. However, it is not until Tōma intervenes and beats Accelerator, proving Accelerator to be really weak, that the project is canceled and the remaining 9969 surviving Sisters are spared.
After the events of the third novel, she eventually develops strong romantic feelings towards Tōma but is unable to express them due to her insecurities and the fact other girls are also interested in him, and he treats her like a tsundere. In volume 5, she requests that Toma to act as her boyfriend in order to get rid of Etzali (disguised as Mitsuki Unabara). In volume 12, she used a punishment game as an opportunity to ask Toma and her to act as lovers. Even though she and Tōma tend to bicker and argue with each other, they share a friendly relationship. During the events of the 14th novel, she calls Tōma, who is on a trip to Avignon, France when he is attacked by Terra of the Left. Even though his cellphone is damaged, Mikoto is still able to listen in on the conversation on the other end and is shocked to hear from Terra that Tōma actually lost his memories and has been hiding this fact from his friends all this time. Confused, she confronts Tōma when he returns to Academy City in the 16th novel; she is relieved that Tōma still remembers the incident with Accelerator and the Sisters. After that, Mikoto overcomes her initial confusion regarding her concern for him and realizes she loves Tōma. She reappears in volume 20, when upon learning Russia might launch missiles against Academy City and seeing Tōma in a live TV report from Russia, Mikoto heads to Russia after hijacking a jet from the Academy City Invasion Force (incidentally, said jet was ordered to find and capture Tōma). After arriving in Russia, she and Misaka 10777 head towards a nuclear military base to stop missiles from launching. Near the end of volume 22, she tries to rescue Tōma from the falling Star of Bethlehem but he stays behind in order to stop an Archangel. After the Star's destruction, she tries to find him but only finds his cellphone strap.
During the Daihasei Festival, Misaka 10032 is kidnapped by Gensei Kihara who schemes is to gather the requirements for his attempts to make Mikoto a Level 6. Gensei required Exterior, the giant cultivated brain used by Misaki in order to infect the Misaka Network with the electric virus and get around its defenses. His forced attempt in creating a level 6 involves sending Mikoto's power out of control. At 53% of the theoretical limit her mind would transform into something from a different dimension. Afterwards, Mitori likely used the Exterior to guide Mikoto's psyche. She brings out her fears and anger towards the city, and has her attack the Windowless Building, saying bad things would happen and someone will always get hurt. Mikoto complies and uses her newfound power to make an incredibly powerful beam of electricity descend from the overcast sky, though the Windowless Building survives. Tōma, allied with Sogiita Gunha, are confronted by Mikoto's huge mass made of metal and rubbles formed from various metal containing structures. Mikoto's subconscious wakes up, but she has no control over her transformed body, as the great black sphere of energy continues to grow, and energy exudes from the ground. The sphere's power was too great for Tōma's right arm to bear and it is ripped from his body intact. At that moment, the Dragon Strike in the form of eight other dragons emerges, and then bites the black spheres and makes Mikoto's transformation crumbles away. With Mikoto restored, Tōma comforts her that there are people who working to help her change bit by bit; agrees with tears in her eyes.
After the Third World War, Mikoto returns to Academy City feeling depressed state over failing to save Tōma, but is relieved when she is reunited with him, as he survived after returning to Academy City. Later, she was one of the few who were involved in an operation in Hawaii. She intended to enroll in Tōma's school during the Ichihanaran Festival, though this was interrupted by Misaki Shokuhō.
Accelerator (一方通行 (アクセラレータ), Akuserarēta)
Voiced by: Nobuhiko Okamoto (Japanese), Austin Tindle (English)
Accelerator is one of the main characters in the science side in A Certain Magical Index, and also one of the antagonists in A Certain Scientific Railgun as well as the main protagonist and the titular character of A Certain Scientific Accelerator. He is the most powerful esper in Academy City, ranking at the top of the seven Level 5s in the city. His real name is unknown, though Accelerator recalls his surname was composed of two kanji characters and his given name consisted of three kanji characters. First appearing as an antagonist of the third light novel, he later becomes a main protagonist in the science side of the Toaru Majutsu no Index series in a notable number of volumes of the light novels. His name is written as "Ippōtsūkō", meaning "One-Way Road". His ability allows him to control any vector he touches including motion, heat, electricity, and wind. This allows him to perform various feats such as reflecting bullets, launching heavy objects, and even reversing the flow of blood in people's bodies. Since his natural ability blocks all ultraviolet radiation, he has an appearance with white hair.
Accelerator's unique ability makes him the subject of an experiment attempting to create the first Level 6 esper: according to the city's best supercomputer, Tree Diagram (which was unprecedentedly destroyed by Index's Dragon Breath), this feat could only be achieved by killing Misaka Mikoto, the Railgun, 128 times without a single failure. Since it was impossible to procure 128 Railguns, an alternative plan was formed to "level up" Accelerator by having him kill 20,000 skilled Level 3 espers: the Misaka clones. He willingly joins the experiment to gain a reputation as the most powerful and feared esper so that no one would be foolish enough to challenge him. His desire to achieve this goal leads him to kill many who got in his way. Mikoto tries to stop the experiment to save her sisters, but it is Tōma who finally does so and defeats Accelerator after discovering his weakness: Accelerator was physically weak because of his total reliance on his powers and his overconfidence in his esper abilities. Therefore, Tōma beat him with his Imagine Breaker and street-fighting skills.
After his defeat in volume three of the light novels, he reappears in the fifth novel where his past was also revealed. He was taken to Academy City at a young age when his powers were first discovered but because of the lack in their understanding of his powers, people fear him and in some cases tried to kill him. Due to the many attempts on his life and the numerous experiments performed on him, these events shaped Accelerator into a sadist and made it difficult for him to trust anyone except for Kikyou Yoshikawa, the only scientist who ever cared about him and saved his life. He also takes a more heroic and fatherly role by protecting a young girl named Last Order, the last Misaka clone who believes through the memories of the Sister clones who fought him that Accelerator is not bad person and actually never wanted to hurt the clones but tried to merely intimidate them into not fighting him, a theory Accelerator dismisses. In the aftermath of the incident, Accelerator is shot in the head by Ao Amai and acquires aphasia due to brain damage. The injury also affects his ability but Heaven Canceller jury-rigs a choker-like device to his brain, allowing Accelerator to tap into the Misaka Network to make up for his injury and function normally. He can also switch the transmitter to full power, restoring his ability for a maximum of 15 minutes at the beginning, but the time is later extended to 30 minutes by an update to the device. Toward the end of volume 13, Accelerator begins to "awaken" after nearly being killed by Amata Kihara and his aphasia is somehow temporarily cured. He truly "awakens" in volume 15, gaining black wings when fighting another "awakened" level 5, Teitoku Kakine. In the events of the 19th novel he meets Aiwass, a higher dimensional being, summoned to their plane of existence. Aiwass explains to him when AIM entities like him are manifested, Last Order is heavily strained and may die if left untreated. To help Last Order, who has collapsed from sustaining Aiwass, Accelerator follows Aiwass' advice and heads to Russia during World War III in search of Index, unaware that he has met her before.
In Russia, after being ambushed by Russian mages, he acquires the "Goatskin", a mysterious document sought after by both Academy City and the Russian government that has the knowledge about the Archangels and Heaven, and later runs into a Misaka Worst clone, learning that Aleister intends to eliminate Last Order, now obsolete to create a new Misaka network. Despite being more powerful than Misaka Worst, Accelerator is unable to bring himself to harm another Sister clone after the Level 6 experiment and becomes mentally unstable after the clone attempts to kill Last Order and later tries to kill herself. Accelerator goes on a rampage until Tōma arrives where he turns his frustration regarding Last Order's condition onto Tōma and a fight ensues between the two. After Accelerator is defeated again, Tōma uses his Imagine Breaker to stabilize Last Order and leaves a note informing him of Index's true whereabouts. Later, he joins forces with Elizarinian soldiers and Misaka Worst to find spies in their country, and fought Archangel Gabriel along with Hyōka, where after studying the Goatskin, he learns to understand the angel's language and turning himself into an angel as a side effect. With his new powers, he is able to decode one of Index's songs and was finally able to cure Last Order but is injured in the process.
After the Third World War, Accelerator is given his freedom with the help of Shiage, after he threatens the Academy City's administration to leave him, Last Order and Misaka Worst alone and orders them to stop all illegal black projects in the city. However, both he and Shiage actions anger a new group of espers called the "Freshmen" who are aware of the existences of Magic and sees them as an obstacle in Academy City's war against the Magic factions. After being helped by Tōma and Leivinia Birdway, the latter invites him to join the world of Magic.
Shiage Hamazura (浜面 仕上, Hamazura Shiage)
Voiced by: Satoshi Hino (Japanese), Clifford Chapin (English)
Shiage is one of the main characters in the science side in A Certain Magical Index he is a former member of Skill-Out, a group of Level 0s who use various means to counter esper abilities, who accidentally gets caught up with the Dark side of Academy City. He is first introduced in the Side Story novels where he became the leader of his Skill-Out gang after Accelerator killed the former leader, his best friend Ritoku Komaba on the orders of the Board of Directors. On the same day he became the new leader, his gang was forced by the Board of Directors to kill Mikoto's mother, Misuzu or face extermination. However, he and his gang were defeated by Tōma and Accelerator and they failed to kill Misuzu. Humiliated, he left the gang to his friend Hattori Hanzo and became a chauffeur and informant for Team ITEM where he fell in love with one of their members, Rikō Takitsubo.
During the 15th novel, Team ITEM is involved in a war between the various underground organization where Shiage helps them by providing transport by stealing cars around the city. But when Team ITEM is defeated by Team SCHOOL led by its leader, Teitoku Kakine, Shizuri Mugino, the leader of Team ITEM, wants revenge for being humiliated no matter what and forces an injured Rikō to use her powers to find Teitoku despite the fact that repeated use of her powers will kill her. In order to save Rikō, Shiage fights against Shizuri and despite the odds, he manages to defeat Shizuri by using her pride and powers against her. However, this unexpected incident becomes a thorn in Aleister's plans as there was no way Shiage could defeat Shizuri as she is a Level 5. Seeing him as a unpredictable anomaly that will disrupt his future plans, Aleister puts a bounty on Shiage and orders the forces of Academy City's dark side to kill him. Ironically, he is saved by Shizuri, who survived their battle and now has a sense of twisted love for him (declaring she will castrate him as her sign of affection). She lets him and Rikō escape Academy City by stealing a jet and shoots down his pursuers, declaring that he is her prey and hers alone.
Shiage and Rikō escapes to Russia only to find themselves in a war between Academy City and Russia. After being saved by Acqua of the Back, Shiage and Rikō heads to the nation of Elizarina where Rikō is partially healed by Accelerator and aids Acqua. In order to protect a document called the Kremlin Report, Shiage and Rikō heads towards the same nuclear military base that Mikoto went while they were being chased by Academy City forces and later Shizuri. However Shizuri collapses from over-exhaustion as her fragile body is suffering from the effects of using too much Body Crystal, a dangerous drug that Rikō uses to activate her powers. Unable to see her this way, Shiage begs Shizuri to let go of her pride and see reason and be the Shizuri that use to care for her teammates which strokes a cord within her and makes peace with him as she protects him and Rikō from the rest of the invading Academy City forces. After capturing a member of the Board of Directors who led the Academy City forces and torturing him, he reveals to Shiage a document called the Parameter List, which reveals that the Academy City administration has been secretly interfering with the Power Curriculum Program and preventing most of the city's students from gaining or raising their powers.
After the Third World War, Shiage is given amnesty and the assassination order on him removed thanks to Accelerator and makes a deal with the Academy City's administration, where he will not expose the truth about the Parameter List and he, along with Rikō and Shizuri are allowed to return to Academy City to reform Team ITEM. However, his and Accelerator's actions have made them enemies with a new group of espers called the "Freshmen" which is aware of the existence of Magic who sees both of them as an obstacle in Academy City's war against the Magic factions. After Tōma and Leivinia help him and Accelerator against the "Freshmen", Tōma introduces them to the world of Magic.


== Academy CityEdit ==


=== Students and ResidentsEdit ===


==== A Certain High SchoolEdit ====
The unnamed high school that Tōma and his friends attend.
Motoharu Tsuchimikado (土御門 元春, Tsuchimikado Motoharu)
Voiced by: Anri Katsu (Japanese), Newton Pittman (English)
Motoharu is a blonde teenager who is always seen with sunglasses and wearing an Aloha shirt. He is one of Tōma's best friends and classmate who just happens to be his next-door neighbor at the dormitory they're staying at. He calls him "Kami-nyan". He unashamedly has a crush on his adopted sister Maika and often ends his sentences with 'nya' (the Japanese equivalent of 'meow'.) While he seems like a normal, average teenager, Tsuchimikado is actually a former agent of Necessarius who became a freelance spy for Necessarius, Academy City, and other unknown organizations. The leaders of both Necessarius and Academy City are both aware of this but have decided to not take action. His sorcery name is Fallere825, "The Back-stabbing Blade" (背中刺す刃, Senaka Sasu Yaiba).
Motoharu is a skilled Onmyōji as his family are descendants of Abe no Seimei, but as he went under the esper development curriculum, using any magic would cause intense damage to his body. He was ordered by the church to infiltrate Academy City. To avoid suspicion, an artificial family was created with Ashiya Touzu and Urabe Bishu acting as his parents, while he adopted a younger sister named Maika from an orphanage outside of the City. Despite the efforts, he was exposed within 36 hours and turned into a double agent to ensure his survival. He is in love with Maika, and for this he is known as the Shisukon Gunsō (シスコン軍曹, "Sis-con Sergeant"). He is also a member of one of Academy City's secret organizations, "GROUP". His esper ability is Level 0 Auto-Rebirth (肉体再生 （オートリバース）, Ōto Ribāsu, lit. "Body Regeneration"). Due to this power, he can still use magic as he can repair the damage done to his body, making him the only successful esper-magician hybrid. Despite these advantages, he avoids using magic except in the most desperate situations as he cannot avoid the extreme pain caused by using it and the fact that his esper ability can fail at any time.
Motoharu was first majorly involved in Angel Fall, and discovered that Tōya was the one who accidentally casted Angel Fall. Motoharu said that himself would need to be sacrificed to stop Angel Fall, as he fought and defeated Tōma who tried to stop him and successfully destroyed the ritual location. However, he revealed later on that he survived through his esper abilities. Motoharu also played a big role during the Daihasei Festival, helping Tōma looking for the Stab Sword and later providing information through casting a magic spell to determine Oriana's location after being injured by Oriana, and was later defeated by Oriana for the second time. He then regroups with Stiyl and Tōma to destroy Croce di Pietro in 23rd School District, but was caught in a trap and forced to see out Stiyl and Tōma fight Oriana. Motoharu travels to France along with Tōma to stop the activation of the Document of Constantine, but was split up from Tōma when they jumped out of the plane, and only reappears when Tōma and Itsuwa was fighting Terra of the Left, and helps them destroy rampaging Academy City forces. During Battle Royale he was tasked along with GROUP to stop SCHOOL and BLOCK's revolution, GROUP has successfully ruined BLOCK's attempt to bring in mercenaries from outside Academy City and Motoharu was defeated by Megumi Teshio. Later he retrieved the Pincet Glove during Accelerator's fight with Teitoku and with it he discovered the existence of DRAGON thus he looks into it, before getting knocked out by Aiwass after his manifestation.
After learning that Maika might be used as a bargaining chip against him, he faked her death by burning her apartment and went investigating the people behind Agitate Halation. He fooled Tōma, who he thinks would cause most interference to his plan, into investigating a magician in the School Garden. He found Hisako Yakumi, who was able to convince him that she wasn't the mastermind behind this project, and confronts Seria Kumokawa has Tsugutoshi Kaizumi instead. Seria successfully shot Motoharu and he was eventually defeated by Tōma who has escaped the School Garden, and discovers that Hisako Yakumi is indeed the mastermind behind the project. After these events, Seria was sent to execute Motoharu, but she has fired paint rounds containing his blood instead and knocked him down to the river. He is officially considered dead on paper by Academy City.
Pierce Aogami (青髪ピアス, Aogami Piasu, lit. "Blue hair and piercings")
Voiced by: Yoshihisa Kawahara (Japanese), Scott Freeman (English)
One of Tōma's best friends and classmate whose real name is unknown, and was considered strong by Tōma before Tōma's memory loss. Despite never been seen doing much class work, he is surprisingly the class representative. A funny individual who tends to notice Tōma's bad luck, and has calls him "Kami-yan" in a different way. He is a self-confessed pervert, lolicon, masochist, as well as numerous other fetishes who enjoys being punished by his teacher, Komoe. He is frequently seen with Motoharu. He, Motoharu, and Tōma are known as the "Idiot Trio" in their class as they have the lowest test scores, often requiring to sit for remedial lessons, although he has noted that he fails his tests on purpose to get punished by Komoe. He is frequently questioned by the authorities as it was revealed that he has been questioned 43 times in the current year.
Seiri Fukiyose (吹寄 制理, Fukiyose Seiri)
Voiced by: Ayumi Fujimura (Japanese), Skyler McIntosh (English)
Tōma's classmate and Aisa's best friend. She is often seen taking up roles of the class representative instead of Pierce, the actual class representative. She hates people who give up on their lives and blame their bad luck like Tōma, yet she secretly has a crush on him, acting like a tsundere when she is with him. She is described as a girl who is "pretty but lacks sex appeal". A health-product freak, she is frequently ordering different health products from shopping channels. Her abilities have yet to be revealed.
Aisa Himegami (姫神 秋沙, Himegami Aisa)
Voiced by: Mamiko Noto (Japanese), Lindsay Seidel (English)
A quiet young girl with a rather blunt personality who wears miko attire. While she may seem normal, she is also known as Deep Blood (吸血殺し (ディープブラッド), Dīpu Buraddo, "Vampire Killer"), possessing the ability to kill vampires when they approach her, as her blood's smell attracts them. However, it made her miserable because it killed her family and friends that were turned into vampires. This prompts her to go to Academy City, hoping to find a way to get rid of her powers, until she meets the alchemist Aureolus Izzard. She cooperates with him because he told her that her blood can be used to save the life of a person he cared for (Index) in return for helping her get rid of her powers.
When Aureolus learns Index's life was already saved by Tōma and tries to kill him, Aisa attempts to defend Tōma, which prompts Aureolus to use his alchemy to try to kill her as she was now useless to him. Her life was saved by Tōma who dispelled the spell on her with his right hand. When she asks Tōma about why he saved her, he told her that he did not have a reason to rescue her. After the incident, she lives with Tōma and Index but later moves to Komoe's apartment and wears a magical power-blocking cross, which enables her to live what she had always wanted: a normal life. She initially attends Kirigaoka Academy, but transfers to Tōma's school when her sponsor, Aureolus, mysteriously disappears, thus ending her enrollment at Kirigaoka. Ever since Tōma saved her life, Aisa started to have feelings for him, which is ironic as she once joked that Tōma's life was like a dating sim. It is later revealed that Aisa is a Gemstone, a codename for espers who were born with unique powers.
Seria Kumokawa (雲川 芹亜, Kumokawa Seria)
Seria is Maria's sister and a third year student in a certain high school, she is seen participating in a beauty contest with Misaki Shokuhō during the Ichihanaran Festival. She is the advisor for Tsugutoshi Kaizumi, a member of the Board of Directors. It is also implied Seria knew Tōma Kamijō from before his memory loss, and is regretful that she has limited control over Tōma's frequent involvement in dangerous situations. Despite not using her superpowers, she is able to defeat her opponents with words and psychology, along with intelligence.


==== Nagatenjōki AcademyEdit ====
Nagatenjōki Academy (長点上機学園, Nagatenjōki Gakuen) is a school where Accelerator attends, it is one of the top five most prestigious schools in Academy City, supposedly the number one. Unlike Tokiwadai, entry is not restricted to just espers but normal students with no powers are allowed admittance as well. It was also stated to have beaten Tokiwadai in Daihaisai Festival last year and this year.
Shinobu Nunotaba (布束 砥信, Nunotaba Shinobu)
Voiced by: Ikumi Hayama (Japanese), Mariela Ortiz (English)
Shinobu is a student from Nagatenjōki Academy, who worked on Project Radio Noise (or the Sisters Project) before it was shut down, creating the Testament system used to give the Sisters knowledge. She was called again when Project Radio Noise was revived to be used for Project Level 6 Shift. However, when she noticed the Sisters clones had something of a conscience, she was unable to see them as objects anymore. She attempted to stop the experiments by using envelopes containing cash cards to lure in witnesses in the unwatched alleyways, where the Sisters would fight Accelerator.
She does not appear to have any powers, but uses good acting to invoke fear into people and make them believe she has a deadly one. It is through her that Mikoto learns about the Sisters experiment. She later infiltrates one of the remaining facilities involved with Project Radio Noise with the hope of installing fear emotions into the Sisters in order to cast doubt and question the morality of the experiment among the scientists involved. However, she was captured by Saiai Kinuhata and her program was apprehended by Last Order before it could spread through the Misaka Network.
In the Railgun S anime, it is shown that she got roped into the STUDY Corporation, where she was involved in creating Febri using the same Testament she used on the Sisters. Wanting Febri to be safe from STUDY's plans, Shinobu helped Febri escape so that she may find Mikoto.
Mio Aizono (相園 美央, Aizono Mio)
Voiced by: Rie Tanaka
The main antagonist of the Toaru Kagaku no Railgun PSP game. She is a Level 4 esper with an ability called Military Oil (油性兵装 (ミリタリーオイル), Miritarī Oiru, "Oiled Armor"), which allows her to manipulate oil into various forms such as armor, weapons and missiles.


==== Tokiwadai Middle SchoolEdit ====
Tokiwadai Middle School (常盤台中学, Tokiwadai Chūgaku) is a school where Mikoto Misaka attends, it is one of the elite five schools of Academy City. This elite girls middle school is located within District 7, the School Garden. As one of the most renowned girl schools in the world, all of the students come from rich backgrounds and are at least Level 3 espers, a requirement to enroll there. The school has the honor of having two of the Level 5 espers studying there.
Kuroko Shirai (白井 黒子, Shirai Kuroko)
Voiced by: Satomi Arai (Japanese), Alison Viktorin (English)
Mikoto's kōhai in Tokiwadai Middle School; a protagonist in Railgun and main character in the eighth volume of the Index light novels. A Level 4 Teleport (空間移動 (テレポート), Terepōto, "Spatial Movement"), she is a member of Judgment, a special public committee group whose duty is to maintain peace and order in Academy City. She has an obsessive, perverted crush on Mikoto, whom she calls "Onee-sama" (revered big sister, "Sissy" in the English dub) and is on the constant lookout for a chance to get physically intimate with her (which isn't appreciated and even gets punched or electro-shocked). She tends to get jealous towards other people who get Mikoto's attention; which usually ends up being Tōma.
Her powers are instant teleportation, which allows her to teleport herself and/or anything she touches under a total weight of around 130-137 kilograms to anywhere within a radius of around 81-85 meters. She generally carries a strap of nails around her leg that she can teleport to pin down enemies. Teleporting objects into other objects displaces them, allowing her to cut through hard objects like giant concrete pillars with just a sheet of glass. One disadvantage of her power is the concentration required to perform, for any disturbance in her concentration will make her powers useless. Following a fierce battle against another Level 4 teleporter, Awaki Musujime, Kuroko is confined to a wheelchair for some time as a result of the damage she took.
Misaki Shokuhō (食蜂 操祈, Shokuhō Misaki)
Voiced by: Azumi Asakura (Japanese), Teri Rogers (English)
A mysterious Level 5 Tokiwadai student that goes under the alias "The Queen". Her ability is Mental Out (心理掌握 (メンタルアウト), Mentaru Auto, Psychological Grip), the ultimate form of telepathy. This allows for near-total manipulation of human minds, including: reading other people's memories, brainwashing, telepathy, memory elimination, amplification of will, reproduction of thought, and transplantation of emotions. She appears to activate/direct this ability using a remote control, a number of which she carries with her in a bag. However, this power does not work on people with electromagnetic properties, such as Mikoto. She has trust issues, where she claimed that she would not trust anyone whose mind she can't read. She has a huge clique of followers where she abuses her mind control ability. She rarely shows herself in public, instead using her followers or mind controlled people to act as her representatives when talking with individuals.
In the past, Misaki was part of an experiment involving the first clone of Mikoto, nicknamed Dolly. She uses her mind control powers to brainwash Dolly into thinking that she is her friend 'Mi-chan' who has left her, to facilitate data taking which has been irregular since her depression from knowing that her friend was appalled at her stitched body. Misaki was also involved with the creation of a facility called 'Exterior', where a part of her brain was cut and bred in an incubator into larger sizes which would allow anyone, espers or non-espers alike, to use her ability. The scientists planned to kill her after the facility is completed. However, she brainwashed the scientists, took control over the facility and escaped to Tokiwadai. She later pursued Gensei Kihara along with Mikoto in order to protect the Exterior.
Misaki is seen participating in a beauty contest with Seria Kumokawa during the Ichihanaran Festival. She later meets Tōma through someone controlled by her during Tōma's quest to pursue a magician named Yuuga Umezaki, who was said to be planning the destruction of School Garden. It was presumed that she knew Tōma and made him angry in the past. She also claimed to trust Tōma no matter what, despite her previous claim to not trust anyone she could not read. She helps Tōma from his pursuers and eventually figured out that Yuuga Umezaki was a ruse created by Motoharu, and later facilitated Tōma's escape from the School Garden.
Mitsuko Kongō (婚后 光子, Kongō Mitsuko)
Voiced by: Minako Kotobuki (Japanese), Jamie Marchi (English)
A Level 4, 2nd year transfer student of Tokiwadai Middle School. As Kuroko's rival, she is confident, boastful, and desires to become a Level 5. Although she if often boastful about her abilities, she usually finds herself the victim of several attacks. Like all Tokidawai students, she lives in one of the school's dormitories albeit her dormitory is located within the School Garden District.
Her ability is called Aero Hand (空力使い (エアロハンド), Earo Hando, "Aerodynamic User") with which any object she touches, a powerful gust of wind will take form, propelling it like a missile. She is able to use multiple outputs to launch heavier objects. She also owns a pet snake named Ekaterina. She originally appears in the eighth novel and makes her first animated appearance in the Railgun anime, though she appears much later on in the manga's storyline.
Kinuho Wannai (湾内 絹保, Wannai Kinuho)
Voiced by: Haruka Tomatsu (Japanese), Kristi Kang (English)
Kinuho is a Level 3 esper and Kuroko's classmate who reside in the same dorms as Mitsuko and is a member of the swim club. Her ability is Hydro Hand (水流操作 (ハイドロハンド), Haidoro Hando, "Aquakinesis"), a form of aquakinesis which allows her to manipulate water. She is able to control up to 300 litres of water in up to four separate clumps within a range of 18 meters. Kinuho was once saved from some thugs by Mikoto and is thankful to Mikoto on what she did. She is often seen hanging around Mitsuko along with Maaya.
Maaya Awatsuki (泡浮 万彬, Awatsuki Maaya)
Voiced by: Yoshino Nanjō (Japanese), Tia Ballard (English)
Maaya is a Level 3 esper and Kuroko's classmate who reside in the same dorms as Mitsuko and is a member of the swim club. Her ability is Float Dial (流体反発 (フロートダイヤル), Furōto Daiyaru, "Fluid Repulsion"), which allows her to alter the buoyancy of herself and her surroundings, letting her make things lighter or heavier. She is often seen hanging around Mitsuko along with Kinuho.


==== Kirigaoka Academy for GirlsEdit ====
Kirigaoka Academy for Girls (霧ヶ丘女学院, Kirigaoka Jyogakuin) is one of the five elite schools of Academy City, this girls high school is unique as unlike other schools, only students with rare and unique powers are allowed to enroll.
Hyōka Kazakiri (風斬 氷華, Kazakiri Hyōka)
Voiced by: Kana Asumi (Japanese), Alexis Tipton (English)
She is Index's first "friend" in Academy City. Gentle but shy, not much is known about her aside from the fact that she was a top student at Kirigaoka, according to Aisa. Her ability is Counter Stop (正体不明 (カウンターストップ), Kauntā Sutoppu, "Unknown Identity"). Details about her level are unknown but it could be high, since it was mentioned that she was among Kirigaoka's top espers. It is later revealed that she is not a human at all but instead an algorithm of the city's esper's AIM with a consciousness. The nature of her being leads her to be indestructible, as she can recreate any damage done to her body and lift objects several times her size, though she would cease to exist if Tōma were to ever touch her with Imagine Breaker. When not physically manifested, she exists in a realm called the Imaginary Number District which she calls 'the city of shimmers', a hidden dimension within the city. During the 12th novel, she returns but as "FUSE=Kazakiri", her artificial angel mode where she is summoned by the Academy City Board of Directors who forcefully control her to stop an attack by Vento of the Front. She reappears again in the 20th novel and flies to Russia in FUSE=Kazakiri mode to stop Fiamma plans and save Index albeit this time on her own accord. She, along with Accelerator, fights against Archangel Gabriel.
Awaki Musujime (結標 淡希, Musujime Awaki)
Voiced by: Harumi Sakurai (Japanese), Bryn Apprill (English)
A sophomore attending Kirigaoka Academy for Girls and is formerly one of the guides to the windowless building where Aleister Crowley resides. She is a Level 4 esper with her teleport ability, Move Point (座標移動 (ムーブポイント), Mūbu Pointo, "Coordinate Movement"). Her teleportation powers are more powerful than Kuroko as she can teleport anything weighing up to 4,500kg without even touching it by a distance up to 800 meters. However, due to a past trauma where she miscalculated and teleported her leg inside a wall, accidentally tearing her leg skin and muscles out from the wall and almost dying, she has a fear of using her powers on herself and feels physically ill whenever she is forced to teleport herself. This fear prevents her from becoming a Level 5.
Awaki officially appeared in the Remnant Arc where she steals the remnant from the destroyed Tree Diagram, and confronts Kuroko and Mikoto who were trying to stop her. Awaki has been afraid that her own ability would hurt others ever since gaining it, and thus wanted to use the Tree Diagram in order to find out whether there is a possibility where animals or plants could develop superpowers instead of humans. Thus, she gathered a group of people with her ideals and allied themselves with an outside organization named 'Science Association' who have the capability to restore Tree Diagram. However, after being pointed out that her ideals are ironic by Kuroko, as it doesn't matter what the ability is, Awaki is the type of person who would hurt others, it broke her mind. She is later defeated by Accelerator and the remnant is destroyed. Awaki later moved in with Komoe Tsukuyomi and is blackmailed to join GROUP for her captured comrades' safety. She fought Megumi Teshio during Battle Royale where the AIM Jammer was affecting her concentration, as she accidentally teleported her own leg into the ground again. However, she was able to overcome her trauma and defeated Megumi.
Mitori Kōzaku (警策 看取, Kōzaku Mitori)
Mitori was a mentally unstable student of Kirigaoka Academy who was assumed dead 2 years ago. However, she is now seen working for MEMBER as a mediator. It was said that she had betrayed MEMBER and used MEMBER for her own purposes.


==== Sakugawa Middle SchoolEdit ====
An ordinary middle school where two of the protagonists from A Certain Scientific Railgun are enrolled.
Kazari Uiharu (初春 飾利, Uiharu Kazari)
Voiced by: Aki Toyosaki (Japanese), Cherami Leigh (English)
Kuroko's friend and colleague in Judgment and another protagonist in Railgun, who also makes small appearances in Index. She is a Level 1 esper who goes to Sakugawa Middle school and is known for wearing a headband made of flowers on her head. Usually shy and humble, her personality will quickly change to overly excited especially if it concerns the life of the upper class, especially anything involving Tokiwadai. A running gag about her is that she has a sweet tooth for desserts but is often called away for Judgment duties before she can enjoy them. She displays various skills with the use of computers, such as repelling hackers and gathering intellegence. In the anime, it is revealed that her ability is "Thermal Hand" (定温保存 (サーマルハンド), Sāmaru Hando, "Fixed Temperature Preservation"), which keeps anything she touches at a constant temperature. Since she cannot handle anything too hot, she limits this ability to keeping things warm. Erii is the only person she has revealed this ability to.
Ruiko Saten (佐天 涙子, Saten Ruiko)
Voiced by: Kanae Itō (Japanese), Brina Palencia (English)
A Level 0 classmate and friend of Kazari's and another protagonist in Railgun. Known for wearing a flower on the left side of her hair, she is rather shameless as she tends to flip Kazari's skirt in public and comment on her panties. She likes to read up on urban legends, most of which turn out to be true, and has a high level of curiosity that often lands her in dangerous situations. Despite her cheeky personality, inside she is a bit disheartened about having no esper potential. When rumors of a special tool that increases esper powers called the "Level Upper" spread, she stumbles upon it by chance and uses it out of envy, consequently winding up in a coma. She gradually recovers thanks to the efforts of Mikoto, Kazari and Level Upper's creator. Whilst under Level Upper's power, her ability was shown to be a lower level version of Aero Hand. Her experience during the Level Upper incident made her appreciated for who and what she is and has made her determined to work hard to achieve her powers. She first appears in the Railgun manga and anime and makes a cameo appearance in the Index light novel series.
Erii Haruue (春上 衿衣, Haruue Erii)
Voiced by: Kana Hanazawa (Japanese), Carrie Savage (English)
A transfer student with a Level 2 "Telepath" (精神感応 (テレパス), Terepasu, "Telepathy") who becomes Kazari's roommate in the Railgun anime adaptation, able to receive thoughts, but not broadcast them. She is a "Child Error", a term for children whose parents stop paying for their children education at Academy City and abandoned them. She keeps a pendant with a photo of her childhood friend and fellow Child Error, Banri Edasaki, who was one of Harumi Kiyama's students who fell into a coma. Due to her telepathic nature, Erii can sometime hear Banri's voice, though this causes her to fall into a daze. Her telepathy is very unusual as under certain circumstances, her powers can rise higher to a level 4 power. Her unique powers was the reason later in the Railgun anime that she is kidnapped by the MAR as she has the potential to become a Level 6 under the Level 6 Ability Crystal Project. However, she is saved by Mikoto and her friends and is reunited with Banri, later moving out of Kazari's apartment to live with her.
Banri Edasaki (枝先 絆理, Edasaki Banri)
Voiced by: Satomi Satō (Japanese), Luci Christian (English)
A Child Error who was one of Harumi Kiyama's students. Harumi was very fond of her, and she was one of the ten participants in the experiment that led to her and her classmates falling into a coma. This incident was the reason that Harumi created the Level Upper Network in order to find a way to cure them. In the anime, she is still able to telepathically communicate with her childhood friend Erii, who is also telepathic. After the Level Upper incident, Harumi, with the help of Heaven Canceller, was able to gather all of her students in order to find a way to cure them. However, they were later taken under the MAR's jurisdiction who, unknown to both of them, was planning to use the children in the Level 6 Ability Crystal Project, as the head of the project was the grandchild of the man who put Banri and her classmates into a coma in the first place. The children are saved from the MAR by Mikoto and her friends and are finally awakened from their coma and reunited with their teacher Harumi. After eventually being discharged from hospital, Banri transfers into Sakugawa Middle School and moves into an apartment with Erii.


==== Other schoolsEdit ====
Maika Tsuchimikado (土御門 舞夏, Tsuchimikado Maika)
Voiced by: Misato Fukuen (Japanese), Lara Woodhull (English)
Motoharu's adopted younger sister, who was adopted to create an artificial family for Motoharu to not raise suspicions as Motoharu infiltrates Academy City. She wears a maid attire as a student of Ryoran Maid School and rides on top of a cleaning bot and doesn't seem to get dizzy at all even with the bot spinning all the time. She has a friendly relationship with Tōma and knows that he has two girls (Index and Aisa) living with him but keeps the secret between her and Tōma and is a good friend of Mikoto and Kuroko as she works at their dormitory. Even though she lives in her school's dormitory, she sometimes goes to live at her brother's apartment; for instance she once stays at said residence because her dormitory's air conditioner broke down. She is openly interested in manga and stories with Yaoi or brother-sister romance.
Fremea Seivelun (フレメア＝セイヴェルン, Furemea Seivuerun)
The sister of Frenda, currently under Shiage's care after being a target of pursuit for the Freshmen. Her ability is Level 0 Agitate Halation (人的資源 (アジテートハレーション), Ajitēto Harēshon, "Human Resources").
Maria Kumokawa (雲川 鞠亜, Kumokawa Maria)
Maria is Maika's classmate in Ryouran Maid School who travels to Baggage City in search of her lost teacher Kagun Kihara. Her ability is Level 2 Violence Doughnut (暴風車軸 (バイオレンスドーナツ), Baiorensu Dōnatsu, "Windstorm Axle").
Mitsuki Unabara (海原 光貴, Unabara Mitsuki)
Voiced by: Daisuke Kishio (Japanese), Justin Pate (English)
The grandson of the principal of Tokiwadai whose ability is Level 4 "Telekinesis" (念動力 (テレキネシス), Terekineshisu, "Telekinetic Force"). He first appears in the 5th novel and episode 18 of the anime series. He attempts to ask Mikoto out on a date and follows her wherever she goes, unnerving her to the point of asking Tōma to pretend to be her boyfriend so Mitsuki will give up. In reality, this "Mitsuki" is actually an impostor named Etzali who kidnapped the real Mitsuki and took his appearance. The real Mitsuki manages to escape and warns Mikoto. Kuroko reveals to Tōma that the real Mitsuki is not terribly intelligent, having obtained his grades by using his telekinetic esper abilities to reverse engineer answers from a computer's radiation and heat emissions.
Mii Konori (固法 美偉, Konori Mii)
Voiced by: Kana Ueda (Japanese), Trina Nishimura (English)
A high school student and Chief of the 177th Branch of Judgment where Kazari and Kuroko work. As their senpai before becoming chief, she tries to make sure both girls do their work at Judgment seriously and at the same time wants them to be safe. She is a Level 3 esper with a power called Clairvoyance (透視系能力 (クレアボイアンス), Kureaboiansu, "X-Ray System Ability") which gives her X-ray vision, allowing her to spot concealed weapons. In the past, she used to be a member of a Skill-Out gang called Big Spider to find a purpose in her life. It was there where she met and fell in love with Wataru Kurozuma, the leader of Big Spider. But after his supposed "death" two years ago, the incident made her change her ways and become the Judgment member she is now.
Miho Jūfuku (重福 省帆, Jūfuku Miho)
Voiced by: Yukari Tamura (Japanese), Leah Clark (English)
Miho is a student of Sekishi Middle School who appears in Toaru Kagaku no Railgun anime. Her ability is Dummy Check (視覚阻害 (ダミーチェック), Damī Chekku, "Visual Inhibition"), which allows her to become invisible to the human eye, but not objects like cameras and mirrors. After being dumped by her boyfriend for a Tokiwadai student because of her weird eyebrows, she uses the Level Upper to enhance her ability to attack Tokiwadai students and draw huge eyebrows on their forehead. Following the Level Upper incident, she later has a crush on Ruiko and is usually shy around her and has since been exchanging letters with her.


==== Skill-OutsEdit ====
Skill-Outs are Level 0 gangs who often use various means to fight espers to compensate for their lack of powers.
Ritoku Komaba (駒場 利徳, Komaba Ritoku)
Voiced by: Kenta Miyake (Japanese), Patrick Seitz (English)
Ritoku is the former leader of Skill-Out who was killed by Accelerator. Ritoku personally disliked conflicts and is very caring towards his friends. He is generally a honorable person as he forbade his subordinates from gathering funds through prostitution and asked them to avoid unnecessary violence. Ritoku was Fremea's guardian prior to his death. Skill-Out originally started banding up to attack weak espers. For revenge, certain espers started attacking Level 0s indiscriminately and the situation snowballed, as Ritoku decided to lead a faction of Skill-Out to resolve the situation. After taking control, Ritoku has united several large Skill-Out factions and devised a plan through creating explosions that would trigger Code Orange which would knock out the communications network, and eliminate a list of espers who have threatened the survival of his comrades in the meantime. His plan, however, was foiled by GROUP's intervention and his eventual death. Despite that, during his final moments, he was satisfied and thought he had "won" as he put his last hopes on Accelerator, who had in turn took up his role to incapacitate the threatening espers.
Hanzō Hattori (服部 半蔵, Hattori Hanzō)
Hanzō is the current leader of Skill-Out, after Komaba's death and Hamazura's absence. Hanzō is a descendant of a ninja family. However, he refuses to accept Kuruwa's attempts to persuade him in reviving his ninja clan. During the Battle Royale, Hanzō tried to persuade Shiage back to Skill-Out, which he refused, and Hanzō later gives him a gun which Shiage used to defeat Shizuri Mugino. Hanzō was guarding Fremea after Ritoku's death and was seen protecting Fremea from the Freshmen.
Wataru Kurozuma (黒妻 綿流, Kurozuma Wataru)
Voiced by: Katsuyuki Konishi (Japanese), Brad Hawkins (English)
The former leader of "Big Spider", a Skill-out gang, in the Railgun anime. He is notable for having a large spider tattoo on his back and enjoys drinking milk. Two years ago, he met Mii when his gang protected a little boy from another gang and had her join Big Spider, even when he found out later that Mii was an esper. He supposedly died in a fire when he tried to rescue his friend Hebitani but in reality, he was actually hospitalized and detained until recently. When he learns that the Big Spider's have abandoned their Skill-Out ideals and become a ruthless gang harassing innocents, he decides to end the gang for good by himself. With the help of Mii, Kuroko and Mikoto, they were able to defeat the gang and stop the new leader of Big Spider, Hebitani. After all the Big Spider members are arrested, he decides to turn himself in to Mii. He is a highly skilled brawler, capable of fighting against large number of armed opponents.


=== SistersEdit ===
Introduced in the third story arc of the series, they are Mikoto Misaka's clones, which Tōma refers to as Misaka's little sisters (御坂妹, Misaka imōto). Unlike Mikoto, they seem rather quiet and emotionless, their voices are rather monotonous and computer-like, and they speak in third person by adding a description of themselves after every sentence. In addition, they wear a special set of goggles that enables them to see electron beams and magnetic field lines for the reason that, unlike Mikoto, they do not have that ability.
Even though they have a weaker variant of Mikoto's electric abilities (Level 3), the Sisters' minds are connected by a special esper ability called Radio Noise (欠陥電気 (レディオノイズ), Redio Noizu, "Flawed Electric"), which enables their brainwaves to become electric signals; this allows them to share their thoughts and memories within their communication network, also known as the Misaka Network. Being rapidly manufactured clones, the Sisters rarely change their facial expression because they have not learned how to. Due to minds having connected to the Misaka Network, most of the Sisters never considered themselves human, yet some of them had slight difference in personalities.
Originally, it was intended that the Sisters were created as efficient Level 5 combat clones for the Military under Project Radio Noise, but the project was halted when the Sisters were revealed to be weaker and were only Level 2 and 3. The Sisters were later used in another project called "Level 6 Shift", where about 20,000 clones were created in total and were used to be killed by the participant who might become the first Level 6 esper, Accelerator. By the time of third novel, 10,031 were killed in the experiment before it was finally stopped by Tōma and Mikoto. After the Level 6 Shift experiment fails, all 9969 surviving Sisters are ordered back to research centers around the world to have "readjustments" so that they will have normal life spans. The Sisters later began showing their own unique personalities to differentiate themselves after learning how to 'disconnect' from the Network and keeping their own private memories inaccessible to the others in the Network.
The following Sisters have the most prominence in the series:
Misaka 10032 (ミサカ10032号)
Voiced by: Nozomi Sasaki (Japanese), Brittney Karbowski (English)
Misaka 10032, also known as Misaka Imōto, is the most prominent clone, being the most featured in the series. She is known for having a soft spot for cats, while she herself has a pet black kitten. She was the second sister clone that Tōma met. Misaka 10032 was Accelerator's latest target in the Level 6 experiment, but Tōma managed to stop him. Confused, she asks why he did it since she was a clone, to which he replied that even though she was a clone, she was still an individual with a life. His words (along with Mikoto's) affect her so much that she and the Sisters decide to help Tōma during his fight against Accelerator.
After the Level 6 experiment was canceled, she was one of ten Sisters to stay in Academy City while the rest went overseas around the world for treatment. She later falls in love with Tōma and receives a heart necklace from him (so he will not mistake her for the original Mikoto), which she treasures.
Misaka 20001 (ミサカ20001号) / Last Order (打ち止め （ラストオーダー）, Rasuto Ōdā)
Voiced by: Rina Hidaka (Japanese), Brittney Karbowski (English)
Misaka clone No. 20001. She is the administrator of the Misaka Network and the fail-safe mechanism in case the Sisters go out of control. She is not designed to function independently and survive for long outside a culture container and appears to be only about ten years old. Due to intercepting an emotion program Shinobu Nunotaba intended to install into all of the clones, she is capable of showing emotions unlike the other sisters and has a close relationship with Mikoto, Misaka Imōto, Accelerator and her adult guardians, Aiho and Kikyō. Like her older clone sisters, she speaks in third person with a description, except she says "Misaka" twice. She has all of the memories of the Misaka clones and has observed Accelerator through this method, posing a theory that Accelerator did not actually want to do the Level 6 Shift experiment. Her name is written as "Uchidome", meaning "The End".
Accelerator meets Last Order when she follows him home one day after he fends off a bunch of street thugs hearing of his defeat against a Level 0. Though Accelerator tries to dissuade her from hanging around him, she persists in following him around because she wants someone to keep her company. She is later kidnapped by Ao Amai so he can infect the Misaka clones to possibly go on a rampage and attack people. Accelerator manages to stop him but gets injured in the process. Last Order and Accelerator are put under the care of Aiho after the incident. Accelerator does all he can to protect her since she is the first person in his life who requested his help. Throughout the story, she remains with Accelerator and has been involved in situations relating to him. After Accelerator's confrontation with Aiwass, she is left in critical condition. However, Accelerator brings Last Order with him to Russia in hopes of finding Index, who may have the knowledge to cure her.
Misaka 9982 (ミサカ9982号)
Voiced by: Nozomi Sasaki (Japanese), Brittney Karbowski (English)
Introduced in A Certain Scientfic Railgun S, she was the first Sister clone Mikoto met. While she was similar to the other clones, 9982 had a rather unusual personality, as she was very interested in the outside world. She was very snarky to people, often giving long detailed critiques on their taste in food. The one thing that she desired was to meet her older "sister", Mikoto, the girl whom she was cloned from. Upon their first meeting, the two had an awful start due 9982's refusal to reveal to Mikoto what the Sisters were involved in, but they both later bonded somewhat after Mikoto gave her a Gekota badge.
Sadly, the meeting would be their last as 9982 was scheduled to fight Accelerator that day. Despite being horribly beaten, including having her leg ripped off, 9982 appreciated the time she spent with Mikoto in her last moments. She died, crushed by a passenger car thrown by Accelerator, still clutching the first and only gift she received from Mikoto.
Full-Tuning (00000号 （フルチューニング）, Furu Chūningu)
Serial-number 00000 of "The Sisters", designed by Ao Amai. As her serial number suggests, she is a prototype clone and the "first" Sister clone. Her details and whereabouts are unknown.
Misaka Worst (番外個体 （ミサカワースト）, Misaka Wāsuto)
The Misaka Worst are a group of specially designed 2nd generation clones of Mikoto that appear in volume 20. Unlike the 1st generation Sister clones who were Level 3 espers and were designed as combat units, these new clones are higher, Level 4 espers and were specially created for special operations; as such, they are well-equipped with battle gear, gliders, and combat masks. Their appearance is that of a slightly older Mikoto with a darker appearance and personality in contrast to the 1st generation clones, who show little emotion. Academy City deploys one of the Misaka Worst in their war against Russia, where she attempts to assassinate Last Order. Accelerator tries to stop her without killing her as he does not want to harm another Sister again. After finally subduing the Misaka Worst assassin, he tries to eliminate her programming to make her harmless but she almost kills herself to prevent that, sending Accelerator into an emotional breakdown. Later in volume 21 novel, she makes peace with Accelerator by assisting him. Their names are written down as "Bangai Misaka" ("Extra Misaka").


=== Staff and administrationEdit ===


==== TeachersEdit ====
Komoe Tsukuyomi (月詠 小萌, Tsukuyomi Komoe)
Voiced by: Kimiko Koyama (Japanese), Jad Saxton (English)
Tōma's homeroom teacher, whose house often becomes home to various others. Despite her childish and very short (135 cm) appearance, she is actually an adult whose apartment is littered with beer cans and cigarette packs, though she often contradicts her age by acting childish to her students and ending her sentences with desu, something a child usually does. This irony means that she is often regarded as one of the seven great mysteries of Academy City. As a teacher, she doesn't have any esper abilities and is capable of assisting in magic spells, assisting Index when healing herself and assisting Stiyl when Aisa gets injured by Oriana. Her name is an aptronym as the character "小" means "small" and the character "萌" means "moe".
Aiho Yomikawa (黄泉川 愛穂, Yomikawa Aiho)
Voiced by: Yūko Kaida (Japanese), Martha Harms (English)
A teacher at Tōma's school and a friend of Komoe. A beautiful woman with glamorous proportions, she is always seen with a green jersey and is known to end her sentences with "Jan". As a member of the Anti-Skills, she is an active peacekeeper and cares deeply for the students of Academy City. As a favor to her old friend, Yomikawa is asked by Kikyō to take care of Accelerator and Last Order after they are released from the hospital.
Tsuzuri Tessō (鉄装 綴里, Tessō Tsuzuri)
Voiced by: Aya Endō (Japanese), Kara Edwards (English)
A grade school teacher who wears glasses with a rather panicky personality and also a member of the Anti-Skills, where she normally partners with Yomikawa. Her lack of confidence makes her prone to messing up on the field. She enjoys beat-em-up games.
Suama Oyafune (親船 素甘, Oyafune Suama)
One of the teachers at Tōma's school and also the daughter of Director Oyafune.


==== ScientistsEdit ====
Kikyō Yoshikawa (芳川 桔梗, Yoshikawa Kikyō)
Voiced by: Yumi Tōma (Japanese), Caitlin Glass (English)
Academy City's researcher. She was in charge of Project Level 6 Shift. Even after the project was put to a stop, she kept herself in the laboratory, creating a vaccine for the virus program that Ao put in Last Order. She is shot by Ao while trying to protect Accelerator and Last Order but recovers and is later released from the hospital along with Accelerator and Last Order. Kikyō is the first adult Accelerator has ever respected due to a fact years ago, he was almost killed in an illegal experiment along with other children but was saved by the Anti-Skills led by Kikyō who raided the lab that perform the experiment. Since that incident, Accelerator owes his life to Kikyō.
Ao Amai (天井 亜雄, Amai Ao)
Voiced by: Tatsuhisa Suzuki (Japanese), Kent Williams (English)
A former researcher for Project Radio Noise (or Project Sisters). His specialty is creating personality data with self-learning capabilities. During Project Level 6 Shift, he was assigned to direct the experiments. Ao hoped the project was a success as he invested a lot of money into it but the project fails due to Tōma and Mikoto's intervention which left him with a large debt. In desperation, he agrees to join a rival organization outside of Academy City by giving them top secret data and as an act loyalty to his new benefactors, he plants a virus upon Last Order. However he plans are foiled by Accelerator but manages to shoot the esper in the head while the latter was busy saving Last Order. Before he gets the chance to finish Accelerator, he is shot by Kikyō. After a long conversation, Kikyo kills him.
Kites Knockraven (カイツ＝ノックレーベン, Kaitsu Nokkurēben)
Voiced by: Kazuyoshi Hayashi (Japanese), Mark Stoddard (English)
Kites was Ao's assistant during Project Level 6 Shift. Kites later appears with Misaki during the Daihasei Festival.
Harumi Kiyama (木山 春生, Kiyama Harumi)
Voiced by: Atsuko Tanaka (Japanese), Anastasia Munoz (English)
A scientist with disheveled hair and little regard for modesty, which is demonstrated when she strips in front of others without thinking about it, a result of her years being a researcher. In Toaru Kagaku no Railgun, she is revealed to be the creator of the Level Upper, which functions as a network to connect the minds of espers who use it. This is also revealed to be the source of her powers, because as the administrator of the Level Upper, she is able to access and control the powers of all the espers linked to the network. Kiyama's intention is to use the network to save her students, a group of Child Errors that were used in an inhumane experiment that left them in a coma; she has resorted to such extreme measures because the city's administration refuses to allow her to use Tree Diagram to find a cure. However, when the network goes out of control, it creates a fetus-like creature known as AIM Burst; feeling responsible for creating it, she decide to sacrifice herself to stop it. Uiharu and Mikoto manages to convince her not to for the sake of her students and Mikoto defeats AIM Burst. After Kiyama is arrested by the Anti-Skills, she promises Mikoto to find another way to saved her students but gives Mikoto a hint regarding the existence of the Sisters. She reappears later in the Railgun anime where she works with Heaven Canceller to find a cure for her students. However, whenever they are close to waking up, their powers overload and cause Poltergeist attacks throughout the city. With the help of Mikoto and her friends, she eventually finds a cure and reawakens her students.


==== Administration officialsEdit ====
Heaven Canceller (冥土帰し (ヘヴンキャンセラー), Hevun Kyanserā)
Voiced by: Yutaka Nakano (Japanese), Cole Brown (English)
Often called "the Frog-Faced Doctor" by Tōma, he is an exceptionally gifted and benevolent physician who can cure any illness and heal any injury, even if it is terminal. He is only unable to heal specific brain-related injuries, such as the Tōma's destroyed memories and Accelerator's computation ability; however, in the latter case, he was able to configure Accelerator to control his powers with support from the Misaka Network. While he may seem just like any other normal doctor, this medical genius has influences in Academy City politics as he happens to be an acquaintance of the General Director of Academy City, Aleister Crowley, as he manages the machines that extends Aleister's life span, while still supporting the foundation of the city itself. The doctor has followed the Hippocratic Oath faithfully and helps anyone no matter who they are and which side they come from. His name is written as "Meido-Gaeshi", meaning "Afterlife Returner".
Tokiwadai Dorm Supervisor (常盤台の寮監, Tokiwadai no Ryōkan)
Voiced by: Shizuka Okohira (Index), Hitomi Nabatame (Railgun) (Japanese), Cynthia Cranz (English)
The unnamed supervisor of the Tokiwadai Dorms who is very strict with the girls of the Tokiwadai dorms who in turn fear her greatly. She often punishes Mikoto and Kuroko for breaking the dorm rules (usually by snapping Kuroko's neck) and shows herself as a scary and fearsome women who does not tolerate rule breakers. Outside of the dorms, however, she helps Child Errors at an orphanage home, where she shows a much more friendly face.


==== Board of DirectorsEdit ====
The Board of Directors consists of twelve people who hold absolute authority in Academy City, with only the thirteenth director, the General Superintendent, above them. Under their administration, they govern the city's everyday activities from funding scientific projects and research to the welfare of its citizens.
Aleister Crowley (アレイスター・クロウリー, Areisutā Kurourī)
Voiced by: Toshihiko Seki (Japanese), Chuck Huber (English)
Based on Aleister Crowley. He was once the greatest magician in modern magic history, where more than half of all modern magicians are affected by this man's established theories, and two-fifths of them are direct followers of his ways. Aleister stretched the boundaries of sorcery farther than the advances made in the last few millennia alone and written many top-class spellbooks like The Book of the Law. His death in 1947 shocked many but it was not the last the world had heard of him. In reality he faked his death to stop his obsessed fanatics following him and secretly went to Japan where during his journey, he met a doctor who he would later call Heaven Canceller. Years later, Aleister, Heaven Canceller and several powerful individuals combined their resources and influences to create one of the most technologically advanced city on Earth at western Tokyo, Academy City. By this time, rumors of Aleister still being alive led some mages to discover the truth. At first they were happy to see that he was alive but were immediately shocked as that not only Aleister abandoned using magic but was more interested in the study and development of espers.
To this day, only a few magicians know Aleister is still alive who are mostly the leaders of powerful magical organizations and their trusted followers and those that do know him view him with skepticism, curiosity on what he's doing or outraged for abandoning magic and supporting science especially esper studies. Not making things any better is the fact Aleister was responsible for the creation of the truce between Science and Magic where neither side is allowed to interfere in each other affairs which has irked both sides. As the General Superintendent of Academy City, Aleister has the final say of the city affairs but usually leaves the city's welfare to the 12 Directors of the board. He resides within a tall, gray building called The Windowless building, known for not having any exterior windows where access to the building is a secret to a few. In there, Aleister's body which has now become younger lies inside a giant glass tube, supported by machines made by Heaven Canceller that extended his lifespan where he plots his mysterious plans.
Tsugutoshi Kaizumi (貝積 継敏, Kaizumi Tsugutoshi)
An old scientist who is interested and the head of researching Gemstones espers. He wishes to bring all Gemstone espers to Academy City for research, yet at the same time believes their rights should be respected.
Monaka Oyafune (親船 最中, Oyafune Monaka)
An elderly kind woman, Monaka is well respected by the student populace as she cares about the their welfare and has no interest in the political in-fighting between the other directors. Her daughter Suama, happens to be one of Tōma's teachers.
Shiokishi (潮岸, Shiokishi)
The director responsible for the city's military, including its armed forces and its research and development of newer military technologies.
Thomas Platinaburg (トマス・プラチナバーグ, Tomasu Purachinabāgu)
Thomas is one of the city's directors who secretly funds Team ITEM, and was gravely injured by Accelerator during the Academy City invasion. He later hired Stephanie Gorgeouspalace to assassinate Accelerator, but was killed by her instead when he tries to use Chimitsu Sunazara's life to bargain with her.
Hisako Yakumi (薬味 久子, Yakumi Hisako)
Hisako is a member of the Board of Directors who is an expert in the medical field. She was inputted Yuiitsu Kihara's intellectual curiosity and thus started the Agitage Halation project in order to enter the realm of the infinite through disguising it as a project to eliminate heroes, who poses a threat to Academy City's scientific development, while she transforms herself into an AIM thought being. Using the shading computer to change the pressure of the AIM fields, the heroes of the city will be artificially inputted a sense of justice to protect the artificial protection target, Fremea Seivelun. However, her plan was ultimately thwarted when Fremea has desired to protect everyone instead, affecting the shading computer. After her AIM thought body was destroyed by the Imagine Breaker, she transfers herself into an information being through the scent of man-eating cockroaches. However, Fräulein Kreutune suddenly appears to eat her, putting her in a situation where she can neither live or die, promising to kill her once she has thought over what she has did. Hisako also has direct control over Rensa.


===== SubordinatesEdit =====
Sugitani (杉谷, Sugitani)
Sugitani is a ninja claiming to be one of Koga’s descendants who is Shiokishi's direct subordinate and acts as a bodyguard. He attempted to fight against Accelerator through imitating the punch Amata Kihara has devised which circumvents Accelerator's reflection, but was however unable to perform it properly and hurt himself in the process, eventually being defeated at the hands of Accelerator.
Rensa (恋査, Rensa)
Rensa is a cyborg who is Academy City's special anti-Level 5 unit. Rensa is piloted by human brains who are reduced to the smallest size possible. The pilots of Rensa all seem to have been saved from desperate situations by Hisako, and hence are willing to sacrifice any amount to pay it back.


=== Underground organizationsEdit ===
Shiage Hamazura


==== SCHOOLEdit ====
Teitoku Kakine (垣根 帝督, Kakine Teitoku)
Teitoku is one of the seven Level 5 espers, ranking second after Accelerator; he is the leader of SCHOOL. His ability is called Dark Matter (未元物質 (ダークマター), Dāku Matā, "Unknown Matter") (not related to the real Dark Matter) which allows him to create an unknown matter that defies the laws of physics and uses it to attack in any way he wants.
He was the "spare plan" for Aleister Crowley's secret project in the event that Accelerator would not meet Crowley's expectations. He did not like the idea and tried to bargain with Aleister by starting a revolution with SCHOOL and stealing the Pincet Glove, using it to defend a Mimosa attack from MEMBER's Professor and kill him along the way, in order to analyze UNDER_LINE, the network at Aleister Crowley uses to monitor Academy City. However, he decided that he had not gained enough leverage for the bargain and decided to eliminate Accelerator instead, and attempted to capture Last Order and kill Kazari Uiharu who was trying to hide Last Order's location. Accelerator eventually arrives and fights him. Later, he learns the true capability of his power and "awakens" and materializes six angelic wings, giving him an appearance similar to a Seraph's. He is able to corner Accelerator, but Accelerator also "awakens" after going berserk from Teitoku's attempt to involve innocents, including Aiho Yomikawa into the fight, and defeats him while ripping apart most of his body.
Teitoku's brain was retrieved, placed in a fridge, and kept alive by Dark Legacy, a tool created by Heaven Canceller that could rapidly reproduce cells to keep anything alive. Only electric stimuli was needed to make him create Dark Matter as Academy City started the production of Equ.DarkMatter Powered Suits. Teitoku later learns how to create human tissues using Dark Matter through Kihara Byouri, and thus recreated his body from Dark Matter alone. During the Ichihanaran Festival, he was requested by Yuiitsu Kihara to capture Fräulein Kreutune. He created White Beetles, which are beings like cyborgs that could wield his power that he could himself control within the network range, as he begins to fight Accelerator and Shizuri. However, due to interference from Rikou Takitsubo's AIM Stalker, Beetle 05, who has a caring personality, had lost control and started taking over the system, and became the new Teitoku Kakine, ending the fight. The new Teitoku now serves as a protector of the innocents in the city protecting his friends Last Order, Fremea and Fräulein. He later engages in a fight against Rensa along with Tōma to protect Fremea.
Girl in a dress (ドレスの少女, Doresu no Shōjo)
A mysterious beautiful girl who has an ability called Measure Heart (心理定規 （メジャーハート）, Mejā Hāto, "Mind Ruler") which allows her to modify the "distance between people's hearts". She uses her ability to play with Shiage Hamazura and decided to let Shiage and Rikou go after deciding they're not a threat to SCHOOL's plans. She refused to take part in the battle against Accelerator as she noted that her survival is not guaranteed. After SCHOOL's dissolution following Kakine's defeat at Accelerator's hands in Battle Royale, a new team was created where she and Saiai were part of. She restrained her new teammate Saiai and led the remains of the Hound Dogs to hunt down Shiage on orders. However, Shiage managed to escape and boarded a plane to Russia.
Chimitsu Sunazara (砂皿 緻密, Sunazara Chimitsu)
Chimitsu is a mercenary employed by the SCHOOL, replacing a previous sniper who was killed by ITEM. Chimitsu uses an Academy City-made magnetic sniper rifle, and tried to kill Monaka Oyafune to signal the start of SCHOOL's revolution, but was however stopped by Accelerator and Motoharu. During the assault of ITEM's hideout, he took on Saiai Kinuhata while Teitoku takes on Shizuri, but his sniping was rendered ineffective due to Saiai's ability and was defeated. He later falls into a long-term coma but is able to provide Academy City with sniping experience through electronic equipments.
Boy with goggles (ゴーグルの少年, Gōguru no Shōnen)
A member of SCHOOL whose real name is unknown. Wears a peculiar head equipment hence his nickname. During the Battle Royale, he kills Management for getting himself captured by Motoharu. However, he was later killed by Shizuri.


==== ITEMEdit ====
Shizuri Mugino (麦野 沈利, Mugino Shizuri)
Voiced by: Ami Koshimizu (Japanese), Lydia Mackay (English)
Shizuri is one of the seven Level 5 espers, ranking fourth after Mikoto Misaka, she is the leader of ITEM, which is at odds with SCHOOL. Shizuri is capable of showing kindness to her teammates and even protecting them when they are in danger. However, she usually looks down upon lower-level espers and does not mind eliminating people who get in her way or go against her, regardless of whether they are enemies or allies. Her ability is Meltdowner (原子崩し （メルトダウナー）, Merutodaunā, "Atom Breaker"), which converts electrons into an unstable destructive matter. Her power can create multiple beams that can sear through objects, or she can defend herself by creating a shield of energy. She can also use silicon cards to split her attacks into multiple blasts.
During the Sisters arc, she and her group were hired to stop Mikoto from destroying the facilities involving Project Level 6 Shift, though is defeated when Mikoto uses the tools that Frenda left against her. In the Battle Royale, ITEM was tasked with eliminating SCHOOL. While Shizuri took out Boy in Goggles in the attack, she was defeated by Teitoku and barely managed to escape, leaving Frenda and Saiai behind. Frenda who succumbed to a death threat by Teitoku revealed ITEM's hideout and thus led to Shizuri's second defeat of the day to Teitoku. Enraged by Frenda's betrayal, she went into a manhunt for Frenda and killed her. Dragging Frenda's bloody upper body, Shizuri went looking for Rikou, who was at that point on the verge of death from Body Crystal abuse, demanded her to use her powers to search for Teitoku, and fights Shiage who took away the Body Crystal. Shizuri blasted a strong beam of Meltdowner towards Shiage, who managed to dodge it by pure chance, while blasting away her own arm in the process. As Shiage loses his balance, Shizuri went up close to grab the Body Crystal but was instead shot by Shiage's gun and was defeated.
After her defeat at the hands of Shiage, she was treated by Aleister Crowley, using Heaven Canceller's "Dark Legacy", a tool he discarded a long time ago, for her injuries where she loses her left arm and right eye but is able create a new left arm made of energy, and was again defeated by Shiage in the 23rd school district's airport. Due to trauma and psychological breakdown, she develops a disturbing sense of twisted love for the man who scarred her and helps him escape Academy City but not before declaring to castrate Shiage as her sign of affection. She later becomes part of the Academy City Invasion force against Russia where she manages to intercept Shiage on his way to a nuclear military base. This time using Body Crystal. As her body was unable to take the amount of Body Crystal she has used, she was on the verge of being defeated by Shiage for the 3rd time, before Shiage kneels down, hugs her and begged her to not fight anymore. Moved by Shiage's words, she reconciled by Shiage and Rikou and obtained the Parameter List together as a bargaining chip, returned to Academy and reformed ITEM.
After returning to Academy City, Shizuri had a mechanical eye to replace her missing eye, and a prosthetic arm to replace her missing arm. She did not hesitate to blast away someone who used Frenda's appearance to approach her and later fights against Teitoku along with Accelerator during the Ichihanaran Festival as she tries to save Fremea, where she comments that there is no point dwelling over the fact that she killed someone in the past as only the dead could understand the feelings of the dead.
Rikō Takitsubo (滝壺 理后, Takitsubo Rikō)
Voiced by: Aya Suzaki (Japanese), Megan Shipman (English)
Rikō is a member of ITEM and the girlfriend of Shiage. Her ability is called AIM Stalker (能力追跡 （AIMストーカー）, Eimu Sutōkā, "ability tracker") which she uses to track down espers by memorizing their AIM fields. Her ability also allows her to steal other espers' abilities by memorizing their AIM, potentially allowing her to become the eighth Level 5 esper in Academy City. The downside of her powers is that she cannot activate it by herself therefore she takes a special drug in order to activate her powers. However, using too much of the drugs can cause a strain on her body and even kill her.
When SCHOOL ambushed ITEM's base, Teitoku was looking to kill Rikō as she could potentially be a threat towards his plans. Shiage offered to distract Teitoku as he let Rikō escape, but Rikō pushed Shiage into the elevator instead allowing him to escape. She suffers from heavy damage after fighting Teitoku Kakine; and as a result, she will be on the verge of death if she uses any more of her ability. However, as Shiage comes back to try and save her, Teitoku determined that they won't affect his plans anymore and let them go. Despite that, Shizuri was fixated on defeating Teitoku as forces Rikō to use more of her ability. Shiage decides to take away Rikō's Body Crystal while convincing Aiho Yomikawa to take Rikō away, as Shiage fights Shizuri.
Rikō escapes to Russia along Shiage, from Shizuri's pursue in Academy City, in order to search for a treatment for her condition. When they arrive in Elizarina after escaping from Academy City's mercenaries, Rikō is partially healed and can use her ability again thanks to the efforts of Accelerator and some Elizarinian magicians. It was later revealed by ITEM's superiors that Rikō is an important piece for the scientists as she could potentially alter an esper's Personal Reality, changing the power they wield. Her powers have the potential to achieve the pinnacle of Academy City's Esper Development program, allowing her even take control of Academy City herself. After the reconciliation with Shizuri, Rikō joined the reformed ITEM. During the Ichihanaran Festival, she interfered which Teitoku's Bettle 05 which frees it from Teitoku's control and thus led to Teitoku's defeat against Shizuri and Accelerator.
Saiai Kinuhata (絹旗 最愛, Kinuhata Saiai)
Voiced by: Chinatsu Akasaki (Japanese), Apphia Yu (English)
Saiai is a member of ITEM who was a former subject of Dark May Project (暗闇の五月計画, Ankoku no Satsuki Keikaku), whose aim was to create a personal version of Accelerator's ability by using a similar pattern of ability operation. Though the details are not mentioned, she only succeeded in creating a low-level self-defense capability. Her ability is the Level 4 Offense Armour (窒素装甲 （オフェンスアーマー）, Ofensu Āmā, "Nitrogen Armour"), which she uses to control the nitrogen in the atmosphere and create a few centimeters barrier of nitrogen that she can use to attack and defend.
In the Sisters Arc, Saiai was tasked by Shizuri to check whether the attacks were merely a diversion, and find Shinobu Nunotaba in the other facility trying to insert emotions within the clones. She subsequently defeated Shinobu easily. During SCHOOL's ambush on ITEM's base in the Battle Royale, Saiai creates a path for Shiage and Rikou to flee and managed to defeat Chimitsu from SCHOOL. However, she was easily defeated by Teitoku later on. Saiai is later placed into a new organization along with Girl in Dress but was instead hunted down by Stephanie Gorgeouspalace, who was trying to avenge Chimitsu. Stephanie discovered her weakness as she tried to remove all nitrogen in an enclosed space, rendering her powers useless. However, as she keeps a can of liquid nitrogen for emergencies, she defeats Stephanie instead. After World War III, she reunited with the remaining members of old ITEM and reformed ITEM.
Frenda Seivelun (フレンダ セイヴェルン, Furenda Seivuerun)
Voiced by: Maaya Uchida (Japanese), Leah Clark (English)
Frenda was a member of ITEM with blonde hair and wears a cap. She feels bossed around by her leader a lot, but yet she is shown to lovingly worshiping Shizuri just like how Kuroko worships Mikoto. She is skilled in close combat and has hidden knives in her shoes. She and the rest of ITEM are hired to stop Mikoto from destroying the last two facilities and is the first line of defense. She makes use of a tape of explosive material and an electronic device to create a fuse that can cut through various objects. Usually the fuses are connected to dolls with explosives within them. During the Battle Royale, she was captured by SCHOOL and forced to spill out ITEM's location, among other things. Being deemed as betraying ITEM by Shizuri, she was killed. Hamazura has noted that the reason Frenda was involved in the darkness might be for her sister Fremea.


==== MEMBEREdit ====
Professor (博士, Hakase)
Real name unknown. Leader of the organization MEMBER. He loves numerical expressions and finds beauty within it. He fights against Teitoku Kakine and is defeated. Aleister Crowley's loyal dog.
Yoshio Baba (馬場 芳郎, Baba Yoshio)
Operative of MEMBER. He supports Professor from afar by using remote-controlled animal robots from an emergency shelter. He has a keen insight and can identify the specifics of an esper's power just from observing them, using whatever means to take advantage of them. In the Railgun manga, he appears in the Daihaisei Festival in an attempt to get a hold of one of the Sisters, but is ultimately thwarted by Kinuho, Maaya and Mikoto.
Saraku (査楽, Saraku)
Operative of MEMBER. His ability is the Level 4 Kill Point (死角移動 （キルポイント）, Kiru Pointo, "Blind-spot Movement"). He can teleport behind his opponent- thus the name "Blind-spot Movement"- but he cannot calculate the theoretical value of the 11th dimension, so he needs to know the current location of his opponent in order to activate his ability.


==== BLOCKEdit ====
Tatsuhiko Saku (佐久 辰彦, Saku Tatsuhiko)
Leader of the organization, BLOCK. The main role of this organization is the observation of the interaction with organizations outside Academy City.
Megumi Teshio (手塩 恵未, Teshio Megumi)
Member of BLOCK. A muscled woman also working as one of the Anti-Skills. She plans to assassinate Aleister Crowley and is after Awaki Musujime, the guide to the Windowless Building.
Tetsumō (鉄網, Tetsumō)
Member of BLOCK. She uses her ability, the Skill Polygraph (意見解析 （スキルポリグラフ）, Sukiru Porigurafu, "Opinion Analysis"), to check out spies and traitors among BLOCK.
Yamate (山手, Yamate)
Member of BLOCK.


==== FreshmenEdit ====
Umidori Kuroyoru (黒夜 海鳥, Kuroyoru Umidori)
Umidori, like Saiai, was a former subject of the Dark May Project (暗闇の五月計画, Ankoku no Satsuki Keikaku). However, unlike Saiai, who followed the curriculum perfectly and was the star of the project, she was regarded as a rebellious troublemaker who eventually killed the researchers and drove the project to bankruptcy. Her ability is Level 4 Bomber Lance (窒素爆槍 (ボンバーランス), Bonbā Ransu, "Nitrogen Bomb Lance"), being able to create nitrogen lances that can be fired from her hands. Due to these lances only being able to be fired from her hands, she makes it up through implanting dozens of cyborg arms.
Silvercross Alpha (シルバークロース＝アルファ, Shirubākurōsu Arufa)
Silvercross is a cyborg and a subordinate of Umidori.


=== Kihara FamilyEdit ===
A family of scientists who are the forerunners of twisted human experiments in the name of science.
Amata Kihara (木原 数多, Kihara Amata)
Voiced by: Keiji Fujiwara (Japanese), Marcus D. Stimac (English)
Introduced in Volume 12 of the novels, he is a former scientist who is now the Commander of the Hound Dogs, Academy City's Black Ops force. He was Accelerator's former guardian and teacher; however, he constantly abused Accelerator with training that subjected him to various extreme experiments designed to kill him, all which left other participants dead, for the sake of teaching Accerlator how to use his powers properly. He reunites with his former student when the Hounds Dogs are ordered to kidnap Last Order from Accelerator. Amata proves to be a difficult opponent for Accelerator because of his thorough understanding of Accelerator's powers and is able to physically hit Accelerator repeatedly and even turn the esper's power against him.
Gensei Kihara (木原 幻生, Kihara Gensei)
Voiced by: Binbin Takaoka (Japanese), Charlie Campbell (English)
A senior scientist in neurology introduced in Toaru Kagaku no Railgun. He may look like a kind old man, but beneath this facade lies a heartless personality which has no problem with using the lives of innocent children, all in the name of science. As Harumi's former boss, he tricked her and her students into participating in an experiment intended to examine conditions where an esper's AIM fields would go out of control and as a result, her students were left comatose. In the Toaru Kagaku no Railgun anime, it is revealed that this experiment was part of a larger plan, the Level 6 Ability Crystal project, which aims to create a Level 6 esper. Gensei theorizes those potential to be Level 6 espers will reach that level when given Ability Crystals, a byproduct made from the essences and proteins of comatose espers as result of their AIM fields going out of control. His current whereabouts are unknown. As his surname suggest, he is the father of Amata Kihara.
Therestina Kihara Lifeline (テレスティーナ・木原・ライフライン, Teresutīna Kihara Raifurain)
Voiced by: Sayaka Ohara (Japanese), Colleen Clinkenbeard (English)
The director and team captain of the Multi Active Rescue or MAR, Academy City's SAR unit who appears in the anime adaptation of Toaru Kagaku no Railgun. A kind and helpful woman, she generally carries around a tube of sweets that she enjoys eating and uses it to play guessing games with others. She and her MAR team work with the Anti-Skills to investigate a series of earthquakes happening in Academy City which in reality are Recurrent Spontaneous Psycho Kinesis incidents also called "The Poltergeists Incidents" while her team helps with the casualties cause by these incidents.
It is later revealed that she is Gensei Kihara's granddaughter and the first test subject in her grandfather's Ability Crystal experiment. Her kind personality is a facade and as she is actually a manipulative woman who enjoys insulting people. She tricks Mikoto into helping her hand over Kiyama's students to MAR to complete her grandfather's experiment. Like the rest of the MAR team, she uses a HsPS-15 Power Armor created by Academy City scientists with hers in Pink Camo paint, but later switches to a smaller and faster, purple colored variant of the HsPS-15 which is equipped with a Milkor MGL and a lance that also doubles as a Railgun. Therestina is the creator of the Capacity Down Sound System, which prevent espers from using their powers properly, and was the one who gave out prototypes of the device to a Skill-Out gang named Big Spider. Therestina's goal was to use Kiyama's students in the Ability Crystal experiment to make Erii into a Level 6 esper at the price of the destruction of Academy City. However, her plans are thwarted thanks to the combined efforts of Mikoto and her friends and is finally defeated by Mikoto. She is currently under the custody of the Anti-Skills.
Byōri Kihara (木原 病理, Kihara Byōri)
Byōri Kihara is a member of the Kihara Family sent to Baggage City.
Ransū Kihara (木原 乱数, Kihara Ransū)
Ransū Kihara is a member of the Kihara Family sent to Baggage City.
Enshū Kihara (木原 円周, Kihara Enshū)
Enshū Kihara is a member of the Kihara Family sent to Baggage City.
Yuītsu Kihara (木原 唯一, Kihara Yuītsu)
Nōkan Kihara (木原 脳幹, Kihara Nōkan)
Nayuta Kihara (木原 那由他, Kihara Nayuta)
Introduced in the Toaru Kagaku no Railgun mini novel written by Ryohgo Narita. She is a member of Judgment who has an ability to control another person AIM fields. She is related to the Kihara family as she is Gensei's granddaughter and Amata's niece. While looking like an ordinary girl, Nayuta is actually a cyborg due to her grandfather's experiments.


=== MercenariesEdit ===
Stephanie Gorgeouspalace (ステファニー＝ゴージャスパレス, Sutefanī Gōjasuparesu)
Stephanie is a mercenary who is a partner and close friend of Chimitsu Sunazara who prefers flashy methods of assassination. Stephanie became a mercenary to make a difference in places of war. She was hired to eliminate Accelerator by Thomas Platinaburg, but kills Thomas instead when he uses Chimitsu's life as a bargaining chip. She later was asked to help Spark Signal eliminate Saiai through creating explosions, robbing Saiai of any nitrogen to control. However, she was defeated as Saiai keeps a canister of liquid nitrogen around for emergencies, and was subsequently captured.
Kuruwa (郭, Kuruwa)
Kuruwa is a ninja who is fixated on the revival of the Hattori clan. As such, she is chasing after Hanzou of the Hattori clan despite Hanzou's lack of interest in her ideals.


=== OthersEdit ===
Fräulein Kreutune (フロイライン＝クロイトゥーネ, Furoirain Kuroitūne)
Fräulein is a woman who has existed since a long time, and was imprisoned in the Windowless Building until she was rescued by Tōma and Thor.
Sphinx (スフィンクス, Sufinkusu)
Sphinx is Index's pet kitten. Index first finds Sphinx in volume two (episode 7 in the anime) inside a box. Tōma tries to convince her that she cannot keep it due to the dorm they live does not allow pets, but they manage to pull it off without anyone suspecting them.
Alisa Meigo (鳴護 アリサ, Meigo Arisa)
Voiced by: Sachika Misawa (Japanese), Megan Shipman (English)
The main heroine of the movie, Toaru Majutsu no Index: Endyimion no Kiseki. Alisa is a Level 0 with an amazing singing voice, who auditions to become the mascot for the Endymion space elevator. After meeting Tōma and Index, she is targeted by Stiyl, who suggests that she could potentially cause a war between the magic and science sides. Shoutaura is interested with Alisa for an unknown reason until it is later revealed Alice is Shoutaura's alter ego who split from her body during the Orion plane crash. By the end of the movie, Alisa merges back into Shoutaura.
Shoutaura Sequenzia (シャットアウラ＝セクウェンツィア, Shattoaura Sekuuentsuia)
Voiced by: Yōko Hikasa (Japanese), Whitney Rodgers (English)
The other heroine of the Index film. Shoutaura is the leader of Academy City's Black Crow unit and one of the 88 survivors of the Orion plane crash incident. Due to the crash, she lost her ability to discern music which sounds like static and hates people using the word miracle. This was because her father was the pilot of the Orion who was the only person who died during the crash whose death was never reported or recanted by Academy City's officials that they were actually 89 passengers due the public's belief all 88 passengers miraculous survive. She rides a mech that shoots discs that explode on impact using wires. During the events of the film, the Black Crows are hired by Ladylee Tangleroad to protect Alisa before her opening performance for the Endymion Space Elevator. After Tōma uses his Imagine Breaker on her, she recalls that she was the one who created Alisa out of her wish to save everyone, stopping Endymion's crash and merge back with her.
Ladylee Tangleroad (レディリー＝タングルロード, Redirī Tangururōdo)
Voiced by: Ayane Sakura (Japanese), Maxey Whitehead (English)
The President of Orbit Portal Company, who spearheaded the project to construct the space elevator Endymion after the Orion plane crash incident. Publicly, she is a ten-year-old prodigy but is actually a thousand years old immortal due to a magical curse. She is later revealed as the antagonist of the film as her goal is to use Endymion, which is a magical Tower of Babylon, and Alisa singing powers to activate a magical array in space to destroy the Northern Hemisphere in order to fulfill her wish to die.
Febri (フェブリ, Feburi)
Voiced by: Iori Nomizu (Japanese), Kara Edwards (English)
A curious young girl who appears in the anime-original arc of the Railgun S anime. She has a child-like innocence and shares an interest in Gekota, particularly a pink Gekota puppet she persuaded Mikoto to give her. She is quite fond of both Ruiko and Mikoto. It is soon revealed she is a 'chemicaloid', an artificial human created by the STUDY Corporation using Shinobu's Testament. Her body produces a poison, requiring her to eat specially designed lollipops made up of a neutralizing compound in order to stay alive, though she herself is unaware of this.
Aiwass (エイワス, Eiwasu)
Aiwass is mysterious, superior being who wrote The Book of the Law and taught Aleister Crowley about magic. In the series, he appears before Accelerator, summoned by Aleister in the form of collected AIM. Unlike Aleister, who judges things on their efficiency, Aiwass judges things on whether it has value or not. As the current administrator of the Misaka Network, Aiwass expands the AIM field into Russia and prompts Kazakiri to restrain Sasha before Archangel Michael descends into her body.


== United KingdomEdit ==
In the United Kingdom, three organizations rule Britain's magical affairs. Each three represent a part of Britain's Magical community. Due the joint ruling between the three organizations, they have made Britain one of the most powerful magical organization in the world, rivaling the Catholic Church.


=== NecessariusEdit ===
The secret magical branch of the Anglican Church. Officially named the "Church of Necessary Evil", the organization was started by Puritans who despise the use of magic in England and sought to destroy it by using magic themselves before abandoning their anti-magic stance and supporting magic. Officially, Necessarius is under the authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury but the current leader of Necessarius is also the Archbishop who now controls the Anglican Church. As one of the three magic powers of Britain, Necessarius represent the religious magic community. Necessarius is currently led by the Archbishop of the Anglican Church herself Laura Stuart.
Laura Stuart (ローラ＝スチュアート, Rōra Suchuāto)
Voiced by: Ayako Kawasumi (Japanese), Carli Mosier (English)
The Archbishop of The Anglican Church and leader of Necessarius. Despite being the Archbishop, she looks like an eighteen-year-old girl with long blonde hair; other than that, any other details about her are unknown. She speaks funny Japanese, courtesy of Tsuchimikado teaching her. She might sound simple and irresponsible, but behind her smile lies a cold and calculating personality which Stiyl remarks that the number good and evil deeds she has done are equal. She loves baths and has a collection of the latest bath accessories from Academy City. Later, it is hinted that Laura is immortal as her appearance has not changed since the disbandment of the British Parliament ten years ago and she may be the most powerful magician in Britain.
Stiyl Magnus (ステイル＝マグヌス, Suteiru Magunusu)
Voiced by: Kishō Taniyama (Japanese), Robert McCollum (English)
A heavy smoker and sorcerer from Necessarius. His sorcery name is Fortis931, "I prove why my name is the strongest here" (我が名が最強である理由をここに証明する, Waga Na ga Saikyō de aru Riyū o Koko ni Shōmei suru). He specializes in using runes to invoke his power over fire, which includes being able to use a flame sword and summon a 3000-degree-Celsius fire elemental called Innocentius (魔女狩りの王, Majokari no Ō, "King of Witch Hunters") to battle his enemies. Styl appears as a man wearing a black robe and has long red hair, and a bar code tattooed on his cheek. Despite his looks, he is actually fourteen years old and is physically weak as casting Innocentius weakens him. While he has a short temper, he is actually kind, as he cares about Index very much and his failure to save her life without losing her memories was his greatest regret. When he learns the Church lied to him and Kaori about Index's condition, Stiyl decides to disobey orders to capture Index and allow her to live her life. Despite the lies, he remains with Necessarius and becomes the assistant to the Archbishop of Necessarius herself.
Currently he acts as a diplomat to Academy City on behalf of the Anglican Church and is usually sent into missions which happen to end up involving Index and Touma. He has since been involved in defeating Aureolus Izzard, where he used his illusion powers to prevent Aureolus's guillotines from hitting Touma. He fought Agnese's Forces during Orsola Aquinas' rescue. During Daihasesai, Stiyl was tasked to stop Oriana Thomson with Touma and Motoharu, where they went for a wild chase for her before eventually defeating her at the 23rd school district. He saved Patricia Birdway from Richard Brave's pursuit and stopped Richard's plan to destroy the Necessarius altogether. During World War III, Stiyl disagrees with Laura as she uses the spare controller she had for Index to fight against Fiamma's controller. Later on Stiyl has to stop a berserk Index by force, keeping her in check until Fiamma was stopped by Touma.
Sherry Cromwell (シェリー＝クロムウェル, Sherī Kuromuweru)
Voiced by: Akeno Watanabe (Japanese), Stephanie Young (English)
Her sorcery name Intimus115, "Everything I offer to my lost friend". A member of Necessarius and a talented "Decoder", she has dark skin and wears a black Gothic Lolita dress. Her blonde hair is unkempt and according to Tsuchimikado, she has the silhouette of a lion. She is a master of Kabbalah Statue art and utilizes oil pastel or chalk to draw a spell to summon a golem Sherry refers to as "Ellis".
Sherry appears in Academy City with the intention of attacking a person of importance to either Academy City or Necessarius in order to cause a conflict and eventually, war between the two factions. During her assault, she reveals to Tōma that she seeks to keep science and magic divided as revenge for her late friend Ellis, an esper from Academy City. Ellis was involved in a secret experiment 20 years ago between Academy City and a faction of Necessarius in an attempt to create the first magician-esper hybrid. But it failed as not only did the espers participants suffered major injuries from magic but were killed by the Knights of England as the experiment was illegal under the truce between Science and Magic. Blaming both sides for letting Ellis suffer and be killed, Sherry swore revenge against them by making them suffered like she did. After she was defeated by Tōma, she was returned to Necessarius and was placed under house arrest where she became an unlikely friend of Orsola.
Orsola Aquinas (オルソラ＝アクィナス, Orusora Akwinasu)
Voiced by: Aya Endō (Japanese), Mallorie Rodak (English)
A blond, blue eye nun from Italy and a skilled decoder. She was originally a famous Roman Catholic nun, but was marked for death when it was revealed she was able to decrypt the Liber AL vel Legis, a grimoire containing dangerous magic. Unknown to the Church, Orsola's attempt to decrypt the grimoire was in order to destroy the book itself. Fearing for her life, she sought the protection of the Amakusa Catholics, but ran away from them as well as she didn't trust them and feared they wanted the knowledge of the grimoire. After meeting Tōma, she learns that both he and Amakusas genuinely wanted to help her and rejoins them as battle nuns from the Catholic Church arrive to assassinate her. However, when they discover Orsola was never capable of deciphering the grimoire at all, the Catholic Church calls off the order to eliminate her and Necessarius grants her sanctuary. While it is unclear if Orsola is a member of Neccesarius, she has helped the organization by using her skills as a decoder. A common joke about her is her absent-mindedness.
Marie Spearhead (メアリエ＝スピアヘッド, Mearie Supiaheddo)
Voiced by: Asami Seto
Marie is one of Stiyl's students who can manipulate water.
Mallybath Blackball (マリーベート＝ブラックボール, Marībēto Burakkubōru)
Voiced by: Megumi Han
Mallybeth is one of Stiyl's students who can manipulate earth.
Jane Elves (ジェーン＝エルブス, Jēn Erubusu)
Voiced by: Risa Taneda (Japanese), Sarah Wiedenheft (English)
Jane is one of Stiyl's students who can manipulate wind.
Theodosia Electra (テオドシア＝エレクトラ, Teodoshia Erekutora)
Theodosia is a member of Necessarius who turned down the work to capture Patricia Birdway, and later defeated Richard Brave, who abused the system to issue the said order.
Tour Guide Girl (ツアーガイドの少女, Tsuā Gaido no Shōjo)
Tour Guide Girl is a tour guide in London who also works as a messenger for Necessarius.


=== Amakusa Catholic ChurchEdit ===
The Amakusa Catholics are a secret order of Japanese warriors. The order was formed during the Edo period when Japan banned Christianity. In order to escape persecution, they merge Shintoism and Buddhism into their Catholic beliefs to hide their religion which led the Amakusas creating a unique fusion of magic. While skilled magicians, the Amakusas are also skilled with martial arts and fighting in groups.
Kaori Kanzaki (神裂 火織, Kanzaki Kaori)
Voiced by: Shizuka Itō (Japanese), Morgan Garrett (English)
An eighteen-year-old Japanese sorceress from Necessarius. Unlike her partner Stiyl, she uses magic to magically strengthen her body. Her sorcery name is Salvare000, "Be the salvation of those who cannot be saved" (救われぬ者に救いの手を, Sukuwarenu Mono ni Sukui no Te o). She uses a two-meter-long nodachi called "Seven Heavens Seven Swords" as her weapon. She has a special attack called Nanasen (七閃, "Seven Flash") that uses her sword and some wires. She used to be a kind woman who treated Index like a sister, but when Index's memories were erased by Necessarius, Kaori changed into a ruthless and silent woman as Index was unable to remember her and consequently distrusted her. After Tōma saves Index's life and her current memories, she decides to let Index stay at Academy City as she feels Tōma can protect her.
Later in the novels, more of her past is revealed. Not only is Kaori a skilled swordswoman, but she is a Catholic Saint possessing the "Stigma" — the ability to call upon God's power — and the former leader of the Amakusa Catholics; however, Kaori left the group as she resented that she had been fated since birth to become its leader, which led to her resenting the concept of luck and fortune. Though she is Catholic, she joined Necessarius in hopes of changing her fate and befriended Index, developing a sisterly relationship with her. The repeated failed attempts to make Index remember her after each memory erasure resulted in Kaori beginning to accept that no matter how much a person tries, no one can change their destiny. However, Kaori begins to show a kinder side to herself after Tōma saves Index, giving her hope that anyone can defy their destiny, and eventually falls in love with him after he helps her reunite with the Amakusa Catholics, becoming more prone to showing emotion and sometimes showing a little embarrassment if she is with him. She is the protagonist of her own spin-off mini light novel bundled with the Toaru Kagaku no Railgun DVDs.
Saiji Tatemiya (建宮 斎字, Tatemiya Saiji)
Voiced by: Kōsuke Toriumi (Japanese), Duncan Brannan (English)
The substitute-Supreme Pontiff of the Amakusa Catholics, who saves people for the sake of saving them rather than for any ulterior motive. A capable leader, he strives to rebuild the group so that Kaori, who left the group and rejected the position of Pontiff in order to protect them from any incidents that would occur as a result of her status as a Saint, would feel welcome to return to them some day. He has impressionable pitch-black hair and a unique sense of fashion, which includes an over-sized shirt and one meter long shoe laces. Saiji is an expert in Amakusa-style combat and is equipped with a 180-centimeter-long Flamberge.
Itsuwa (五和)
Voiced by: Ai Kayano (Japanese), Krishna Smitha (English)
An Amakusa Catholic girl. Originally introduced in the 11th novel, she makes an earlier appearance in the anime episode "The Book of the Law" which is based on the beginning of the 7th novel. In the 11th novel, she fell in love with Tōma after their first meeting, claiming it was Love at first sight but the anime suggests she fell for him much earlier during the Orsola incident in the 7th novel. However due to her shyness, she is unable to properly tell him how she feels. Yet she hopes to get Tōma's attention, even when knowing her senpai and superior Kaori is also in love with him. She has accompanied Tōma and his friends on more than one occasion, including traveling with him to Italy, France, and Britain. In the events of the 16th novel she becomes his bodyguard and caretaker. When Acqua first attacks Academy City, she fails to protect him and tries to heal Tōma with magic but unsuccessfully due to his Imagine Breaker. After Tōma is sent to the hospital she goes into despair for failing to protect him but Saiji rebukes her and tells her to snap out of it as she focus on fighting with Acqua if she wants to protect him. During the Amakusas' rematch against Acqua, Itsuwa suddenly displays a change of personality, becomes full of tranquil fury that even the way she spoke changed. She performed a "Saint Destroyer" spell in that battle, harming Acqua and causing him to lose the "Divine Mother's Mercy" spell which allows them to defeat him.
Her weapon is a Friulian Spear, which by adding layers of reinforcement magic, turns it into a symbol of a 'Thousand Years Tree', which symbolizes the growth of plants and makes certain magic spells to be more potent over time. She also can perform Nanasen (七閃, "Seven Flash") by manipulating her spear and steel wires just like Kaori.
Isahaya (諫早)
An member of the Amakusa Catholics, Isahaya is old man who wields a sword and mace.
Ushibuka (牛深)
An Amakusa Catholic member, a physically enormous man whose main weapon is a battle axe.
Tsushima (対馬)
A female Amakusa Catholic member, she has blonde hair and blue eyes. Her main weapon is a short sword.
Nomozaki (野母崎)
A member of Amakusa Catholics who is married and wields a long sword.
Kōyagi (香焼)
A young Amakusa Catholic member. His main weapon is a dagger.


=== Agnese ForcesEdit ===
A group of over 250 Catholic Battle Nuns who are proficient in magic and combat.
Agnese Sanctis (アニェーゼ＝サンクティス, Anyēze Sankutisu)
Voiced by: Rie Kugimiya (Japanese), Alex Moore (English)
Agnese is the former leader of the Agnese Forces, a group of Battle Nuns under the Catholic Church. She has long red braided hair strands and wears platform shoes to compensate for her small stature. She is first introduced in the 7th novel and the episode The Book of the Law where she and her forces help Necessarius search for Orsola and the Book of the Law grimoire. In reality, the battle nuns' true mission was to kill Orsola out of fear that Orsola would decipher and expose the secrets contained in the grimoire. Agnese wields a staff called Lotus Wand, which any damage she does to the staff also happens to her opponent.
Lucia (ルチア, Ruchia)
Voiced by: Mariya Ise (Japanese), Lauren Landa (English)
Lucia is a member of the Agnese Forces, a tall woman with long blonde hair and blue eyes. She has a serious nature and dislikes non-Catholics very much. Lucia uses a large carriage wheel called the Catherine Wheel, based on the legend of Catherine of Alexandria. When she throws the wheel, she can make it explode into many pieces of shrapnel which injures her opponents and have those broken pieces returns to its original form.
Angelene (アンジェレネ, Anjerene)
Voiced by: Azusa Kataoka (Japanese), Kristin Sutton (English)
Angelene is a nun of the Agnese Forces and Lucia's partner. She is slightly shorter than her partner with longer, braided hair. She seems to be quite shy in contrast to her partner, though her personality at times can be childish, and she does get angry. She has a real sweet tooth for various deserts and sweet drinks. Her magic revolves around four bags she carries around, which are based on the Apostle Matthew. Each bag is based on the four elements of Water, Fire, Wind, and Earth which she uses them to locked on her targets.


=== British Royal FamilyEdit ===
Britain is ruled by the British Royal Family albeit in the Toaru Majutsu no Index series, the current monarch is Queen Elizard, in contrast to Queen Elizabeth II. In the series, members of the Royal family have been skilled magic users for generations. As one of the three magic powers of Britain, the royal family represents the magic nobility. Ten years prior to the events of the novels, Queen Elizard had Parliament disbanded after a faction within Parliament tried to sacrifice her daughter Villain for a spell to destroy all of France’s military forces. Since that incident, Britain has become an Absolute monarchy under her rule.
Elizard (エリザード, Erizādo)
The Queen of England. She carries a replica of the Sword of Mercy, Curtana, which allows her to send telesma to knighthood and the people within the soil of England.
Riméa (リメエア, Rimeea)
The first princess of the British Royal Family and the eldest of Queen Elizard's daughters. She has black hair and uses a monocle to see. While she is notably very intelligent, she is extremely cautious and does not trust anyone who knows that she is a princess. She does not ally herself with her sister Carissa during the civil war, having gone into hiding before the war begins.
Carissa (キャーリサ, Kyārisa)
The second princess of the Royal Family and the second eldest of Queen Elizard's daughters, Carissa possesses an impressive understanding of military strategy and tactics. She launches a rebellion and overthrows her mother, but faces opposition against her younger sister and her allies. Her forces and her allies, the Knights of England, fight against Viliane's forces and her allies, the Church of Necessarius, for the throne, which sparks the English Magic Civil War. During the civil war, it is revealed she carries the original Curtana sword, which grants to the wielder the overwhelming power of the Archangel Michael.
Villian (ヴィリアン, Virian)
The third princess of the Royal Family and the youngest of Queen Elizard's daughters, an apparently timid but virtuous young woman. When her older sister Carissa launches a rebellion and overthrows their mother, Villian was almost executed by her sister's followers. She reluctantly becomes the leader of the opposing force against her sister during the English Magic Civil War along with her allies and the Church of Necessarius.


=== Knights of EnglandEdit ===
An order of magic knights in England. Led by the Knight Commander, the knights have served England since the Crusades and have become the basis of all magic knights over Europe, including the 13th Knights of the Catholic Church and the France's Orléans Knights. As one of the three magic powers of Britain, the Knights represent the magic community within the country's military. The organization has a grudge against Necessarius, whose power has grown equal to the Knights of England, as the Knights find the foundation of Necessarius to be unacceptable.
Knight Leader (騎士団長 (ナイトリーダー), Naito Rīdā, "Knight Commander")
A British noble whose real name is unknown, he is a skilled swordsman and a powerful magician capable of defeating Saints. As the Knight Commander of the Knights of England, he leads one of the three organizations in charge of Britain's magical affairs along with the Royal Family and the Anglican Church. He and the Knights are allied with Princess Carissa forces during the English magic civil war against her sister Villian. The Grand Master is friends with Kaori and Acqua of the Back, both of whom he respects for their skills.


=== New LightEdit ===
Bayloupe (ベイロープ, Beirōpu)
Leader of the New Light. She is the eldest of the group with silvery hair. Like all members in her group they have spear-like weapons and dragon-like accessories. She wears metallic dragon ears. Like the other members of her team she wears the spiritual artifact called "Steel Gloves" which was created to simulate the weapons that Thor, the God of Thunder, used. It gives the holder a great power, physically and magically. Only she can use the power to summon thunder, which is a simulation of Thor's short-handled hammer, Mjöllnir.
Lessar (レッサー, Ressā)
A member of the New Light with black hair and a dragon-like tail accessory. During her introduction she was being chased by Tōma and Oriana, both of whom managed to defeat her. After being captured she revealed that the New Light were hired as couriers for an artifact for one of the British Princesses but before she finished to explain more, she was almost killed by the Knights of England. Tōma managed to save her life in time by bringing her to Orsola. She then took a liking to Tōma and often tries to seduce him. After the end of the English Magic Civil War, she accompanies Tōma on his trip to Russia and fights alongside him against Fiamma.
Floris (フロリス, Furorisu)
A member of the New Light with blonde hair who wears a pair of small dragon wings on her back. She was saved by Tōma once when she was captured by Knights, but according to Lessar was rather angry at him after what happened there.
Lancis (ランシス, Ranshisu)
A member of the New Light with brown hair armed with long dragon talons.


=== Dawn-colored SunlightEdit ===
Dawn-colored Sunlight (明け色の陽射し, Akeiro no Hizashi) is a magical order led by Leivinia Birdway. Their goal is to unite the Science and Magic factions and rule over both of them.
Leivinia Birdway (レイヴィニア バードウェイ, Reivinia Bādowei)
Leader of the 'Dawn-colored Sunlight' organization; her sorcery name is "Regnum771." Though she is only twelve years old, she is an extremely powerful magician with abilities that can match the Saints. Her actions and personality are described as merciless, unreasonable and overwhelming. She saved Tōma from the Arctic Ocean at the end of World War III and proceeds to travel to Academy City and explain magic to Accelerator and Shiage. She convinced them to travel to Hawaii with her and took down Cendrillon at the airport. As they saved Hawaii, 27 Cooperative Institutions of Academy City broke off connections with Academy City leading Tōma to suspect whether she is a member of GREMLIN. During the Ichihanaran Festival, she came to Academy City again, this time with Ollerus, to obstruct GREMLIN's attempt to capture Fräulein Kreutune. While Tōma threatened her, a member of the Anti-Skills accidentally shot Tōma, much to her horror and thus she immediately performed first-aid on him, and took his bait to lure Ollerus' group away. Leivinia later came back to forcibly take Fräulein Kreutune away, but was defeated by Tōma instead, but it was revealed that she didn't use her major arcana as capturing Fräulein is not actually their main objective. She later appears in Tōma dorm with Lessar in an attempt to convince him to side with them in order to destroy Gungnir.
Mark Space (マーク スペース, Maaku Supaasu)
Leivinia's personal assistant within Dawn-colored Sunlight. He is a magician who specializes in using the Minor Arcana of Tarot Cards to perform elemental spells. His sorcery name is "Armare091."


=== OthersEdit ===
Oriana Thomson (オリアナ＝トムソン, Oriana Tomuson)
Voiced by: Ryoka Yuzuki (Japanese), Jennifer Green (English)
A blond English sorceress who works as a mercenary. Her sorcery name is Basis104, "The one who carry the basis." (礎を担いし者, Ishizue o Ninaishi Mono). Her physical appearance is that of a beauty with a rather attractive figure, which makes most women around her jealous. She first appears during the Academy City Sports festival, where she was hired by Lidvia for a special mission to take over the city. She is later hired by Necessarius to help them investigate the source of the Euro Tunnel explosion.
Richard Brave (リチャード＝ブレイブ, Richādo Bureibu)
Richard is a former member of Necessarius who betrayed them after his signature spell which he dedicated his life to, Lævateinn, was deemed illegal for including scientific elements. Richard attempted to capture Patricia Birdway and use Donati's Horoscope in order to cast a magic that would destroy Necessarius, but was ultimately foiled by Stiyl and Theodosia's interference.
Jeans Shop Owner (ジーンズ店主, Jīnzu Tenshu)
Jeans Shop Owner is an unofficial agent of Necessarius who runs a small jeans shop in London and is usually partnered with Kanzaki Kaori in various missions.
Patricia Birdway (パトリシア バードウェイ, Patorishia Bādowei)
Leivinia's younger sister who is unaware that Leivinia is involved in magical affairs, believing that Levinia is merely involved in some of hobby.


== Vatican CityEdit ==


=== Roman Catholic ChurchEdit ===
Matthai Reese (マタイ＝リース, Matai Rīsu)
Voiced by: Masafumi Kimura (Japanese), Bob Magruder (English)
Matthai Reese was formerly The Pope, the head of the Roman Catholic Church in the series. He was a friend and a former disciple of Fiamma of the Right before becoming Pope. When the magic world learns of the existence of Tōma and his powers, Fiamma convinces Matthai that Tōma and his powers are a threat to the world, where Matthai declares Tōma is a heretic that must be eliminated. When Matthai later learns that Fiamma had manipulated him all this time, Fiamma casts a powerful spell to destroy the Vatican, but Matthai manages to divert the spell onto himself to save the city. After his hospitalization and quelling a succession crisis at the Vatican, he heads to Russia in order to stop Fiamma's plans. He stepped down as The Pope after World War III and was succeeded by Petro Yogdis.
Petro Yogdis (ペテロ＝ヨグディス, Petero Yogudisu)
Petro Yogdis is currently The Pope in the series. Unlike his predecessor Matthai Reese, he is less caring and more power oriented.
Aureolus Izzard (アウレオルス＝イザード, Aureorusu Izādo)
Voiced by: Tomokazu Sugita (Japanese), Jason Liebrecht (English)
An 18-year-old alchemist and former Catholic Church magician who turned traitor. His sorcery name is Honos628, "My honor is for the world" (我が名誉は世界のために, Waga Meiyo wa Sekai no Tame ni). He possesses an ability called "Ars Magna", a skill produced by alchemy that turns his thoughts into reality through his words. This ability is heavily reliant on his belief and state of mind; the more he doubts, the weaker his spell becomes until it does not activate at all. Three years before the story began, he was Index's former partner and was devastated when the young nun was forced to have her memories erased in order to save her life. In order to spare Index from repeatably losing her memories, he works with Aisa, using her powers to attract vampires to catch one and use them to turn Index into a vampire to overcome her life expectancy. When he learns that Index has already been saved, he angrily turns on everyone including Aisa, though Tōma stops Aureolus by using his own powers against him and driving him mad. Out of pity, Stiyl changes Aureolus' appearance so that the Catholic Church is unable to capture and punish him.
Lidvia Lorenzetti (リドヴィア＝ロレンツェッティ, Ridovia Rorentsetti)
Voiced by: Rei Sakuma (Japanese), Rachel Robinson (English)
A Catholic nun who first appears in the 9th and 10th novels. She has the 'ability' to convert people to Christianity regardless of who they are, criminals, non-believers, or other magicians that share no connection with the Church. She attempts to convert the Academy City populace into Catholics with the help of an artifact called 'Pietro's Cross' but fails and is captured by Necessarius. She reappears in the 14th novel, being interrogated by Stiyl over God's Right Seat goals.
Biagio Busoni (ビアージオ＝ブゾーニ, Biājio Busōni)
Voiced by: Norio Wakamoto (Japanese), Barry Yandell (English)
Biagio is an elderly Catholic bishop who is introduced in the 11 volume. He is in charge of overseeing the remodeling of a powerful magical weapon known as the, 'Queen of the Adriatic Sea'.


==== God's Right SeatEdit ====
Vento of the Front (前方のヴェント, Zenpō no Vento)
Voiced by: Akiko Hiramatsu (Japanese), Kara Edwards (English)
Member of God's Right Seat. Blessed with the nature of "The Flame of God" (Uriel). Her face is heavily pierced and at its top, she puts on heavy make-up. When she was a child, she went with her brother to an amusement park, and an accident occurred in which her brother died; thus, she grew up with a deep hatred against science and technology. She uses the spell "Divine Retribution", which takes away the consciousness of anyone who has any evil intentions towards her. She also utilizes hammers made of air to bludgeon her opponent. Appearing first in the 11th novel, later in the 12th novel, she invades Academy City and causing havoc there in order to kill Tōma but fails due to Hyōka in FUSE=Kazakiri mode and Amata Kihara's intervention. She is defeated by Tōma but was rescued by Acqua. Vento later returns during the Third World War to hunt down Fiamma for betraying the Vatican.
Terra of the Left (左方のテッラ, Sahō no Terra)
Voiced by: Hōchū Ōtsuka (Japanese), George Manley (English)
Member of God's Right Seat. Blessed with the nature of "God's Medicine" (Raphael). A small, menacing-looking old man wearing a green robe. Tōma and Itsuwa encounters him when they he went to France. He uses the spell "Execution of Light", which can manipulate the hierarchy of everything around him. He also uses a guillotine made of flour, a byproduct of the "Execution of Light" spell. It seems that he knew something about Tōma's Imagine Breaker, but it was never revealed. He also learns of his memory loss during a fight with him. He is later killed by Acqua near the end of the 14th novel.
Acqua of the Back (後方のアックア, Kōhō no Akkua) / William Orwell (ウィリアム＝オルウェル, Uiriamu Oruueru)
Voiced by: Hiroki Tōchi (Japanese), Andrew T. Chandler (English)
Member of God's Right Seat. A former mercenary for the Anglican Church and an old friend of the current Grand Master of the Knights of England, Acqua's true name is William Orwell. His sorcery name is Flere210, "The one who changes the reason of tears". Blessed with the nature of "The Power of God" (Gabriel), Acqua converted to Catholicism and joined God's Right Seat after leaving the Anglican Church. Unlike the other members of God's Right Seat, he is not corrupt and does not ignore the opinions of the Pope. As a sorcerer, he cannot use spells that are used by normal sorcerers, but has been blessed with the spell "Divine Mother's Mercy", which nullifies the liabilities of certain special spells, allowing him to perform powerful spells under unfit conditions. He is a Saint, which endows him with super-human capabilities, including the strength to carry weapons twice as large as him; with "Divine Mother's Mercy" nullifies the limitations of his body, he is able to use 100% of the capabilities offered to him as a Saint. As such, he demonstrates a considerable gap between his abilities and that of Kaori who is also a Saint. After his defeat in hands of the Amakusa Catholics and Tōma in the volume 16, where he loses the "Divine Mother's Mercy", he returns in volume 17 in England wielding a replica of the dragon slayer sword, Ascalon, during the Magic Civil War as an ally of Princess Villian and Necessarius and fights his former friend and comrade, the Grand Master of the Knights of England. Acqua later heads to Russia, in order to stop Fiamma's plans; on the way meets and saves Shiage and Rikō from a group of mercenaries. He ends up helping Accelerator and Hyōka against Archangel Gabriel and weakens Gabriel by absorbing its powers.
Fiamma of the Right (右方のフィアンマ, Uhō no Fianma)
Leader of God's Right Seat. Blessed with the nature of "The Regard of God" (The One Alike to God, Michael). He is a tall, slim man wearing a red suit. According to him, he holds the symbol of miracles, "The Holy Right", which when his power is used, a mirage and bird-like claw appears from his shoulder, which is his main form of attack. However, he cannot use its full potential and believes that Index, Tōma and Sasha Kruezchev hold the answer to his dilemma.
To achieve his goal, Fiamma takes Queen Elizard's spiritual artifact to remotely control Index and heads to Russia during the Third World War to capture Sasha, the key to invoking the Archangel Gabriel, and acquiring the Star of Bethlehem to fix the elemental balance that affects the creation and gains full control of the Holy Right. Knowing that Tōma is aboard the Star of Bethlehem, Fiamma fights Tōma and tries absorbing the flesh of Tōma's Right Hand, but fearfully notices that Tōma's arm is gathering not one but two massive and overwhelming powers. Tōma challenges Fiamma by remarking that if Fiamma is the most powerful existence, he would have no reason to steal the power of various churches; furthermore, Fiamma's powers always adjusts to match his opponent's so he triggered the war to cause enough 'ill will' in the world to set it as 'the enemy that's needs to be defeated' as a result of fearing that he does not the 'power enough to save the world'.
With his conviction lost and defeated, Fiamma is saved by Toma, who convinces him to live to change the future. However, Aleister comes to see Fiamma as a threat for knowing too much about the true purpose of Imagine Breaker and personally attempts to kill him. However, Silvia and Ollerus finds the dying Fiamma and question him about his Aeon of Osiris powers and Aleister's Aeon of Horus powers.


== RussiaEdit ==


=== Russian Orthodox ChurchEdit ===
Krans R. Tsarskiy (クランス＝R＝ツァールスキー, Kuransu R Tsuārusukī)
Krans is a young boy who is currently the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Nikolai Tolstoy (ニコライ＝トルストイ, Nikorai Torusutoi)
A Russian Bishop and Vasilisa's superior within the Russian Orthodox Church. During the Third World War, he allies Annihilatus with Fiamma to capture Sasha for him in exchange that Nikolai becomes the next Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church.


==== AnnihilatusEdit ====
A secret magical organization within the Russian Orthodox Church that fights demons.
Sasha Kruezhev (サーシャ＝クロイツェフ, Sāsha Kuroitsefu)
Voiced by: Yuka Terasaki (Japanese), Kate Oxley (English)
Sasha is a battle nun of Annihilatus, who first appears in the 4th novel and in the episode "Angel Fall". She carries around a bunch of unique weapons, from hammers to saws. During the events of the Angel Fall spell, her body was accidentally switched to the Archangel Gabriel, which prompted the archangel to find the caster of the spell using Sasha's body under the alias "Misha Kruezhev". Sasha later appears as herself in the later novels. She is currently under observation in Moscow due to unusual effects her body suffered when the Archangel used her body. She becomes the target of Fiamma, who succeeds in capturing her during the Third World War and plans to use her as a vessel for an angel as part of his "Bethlehem Plan".
Vasilisa (ワシリーサ, Washirīsa)
Voiced by: Yōko Honna (Japanese), Leah Clark (English)
Sasha's superior and the leader of Annihilatus. Named after a heroine of Russian folklore, Sasha does not like her due to Vasilisa's sometimes childish behavior, her vanity relating to skin health care, and her weird interest in Japanese otaku culture, which she unsuccessfully tries to get Sasha interested. During the Third World War between Russia and Academy City, she betrays Annihilatus to prevent them from using Sasha and hands her over to Vento, while she stays behinds to hold off Annihilatus and Fiamma's subordinates.


=== OthersEdit ===
Saronia A. Irivika (サローニャ＝Ａ＝イリヴィカ, Sarōnya A. Irivika)
Saronia is a Russian magician, and a former pawn of GREMLIN. Her magic revolves around the legend of the forest spirit Leshy to control other people.


== Latin AmericaEdit ==
Return of the Winged One (翼ある者の帰還, Tsubasa Aru Mono no Kikan) is an Aztec-based magic organization. This organization has almost complete control over Latin America, though not to the extent like the Christian churches where they could influence the government.
Etzali (エツァリ, Etsari)
Voiced by: Daisuke Kishio (Japanese), Justin Pate (English)
Etzali is a magician and doppelganger who disguises himself as Mitsuki Unabara. Etzali is from the Return of the Winged One, a Latin American magical organization who sent him to Academy City as a spy to stop and undermine the "Kamijō Faction", a group of espers and mages who are acquaintances of Tōma and are supposedly under his leadership as they see the group as threat to the truce between Science and Magic sides. Borrowing the appearance of Mitsuki, Etzali attempts to become close to Mikoto and kill her, but he ends up falling in love with her instead. After, he tried to kill Tōma but fails and was defeated by him, Etzali makes him promise to protect Mikoto and the world around her. In order to fulfill his promise, he joined GROUP to protect Mikoto from the shadows. During the Battle Royale, he encountered Xochitl who was attempting to kill him due to his betrayal, but however defeated her and took away her grimore as it erodes away her body. He later encounters his leader, Tecpatl, who also tried to kill him with a grimore while infiltrating Shiokishi's base to find out about DRAGON. He managed to use his experience against Xochitl's grimore to defeat and kill Tecpatl. He uses a copy of the obsidian spear of the god Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli, which reflects light from Venus which destroys anything the light falls upon.
Xochitl (ショチトル, Shochitoru)
Xochitl is a South American woman that Ruiko meets during her field trip in Liberal Arts City. She was given an objective to sink Liberal Arts City, and is foiled by Mikoto's intervention. When she was given the new order to destroy all evacuation ships in order to prevent Aztec knowledge's leakage, she disagreed and decided to fight against Tecpatl despite knowing that she'll be punished. As her punishment, she had a grimore forced onto her and sent to kill Etzali who is considered to have betrayed Return of the Winged One. She ended up joining MEMBER, one of the underground factions in Academy City, and battled with Etzali during Battle Royale when she finally found him. However, with the grimore draining away her life, she lost to Etzali and had her grimore took way from her.
Tecpatl (テクパトル, Tekupatoru)
Tecpatl is the former leader of the Return of the Winged One who had disguised as Minobe, one of Shiokishi's bodyguards, hoping to take over his position in the Board of Directors, in order to find information regarding GROUP and hunt down Etzali. After injuring Shiokishi, Tecpatl challenged Etzali but was however killed by him.
Tochtli (トチトリ, Tochitori)
Tochtli is a member of Return of the Winged One and is usually Xochitl's partner who together with Xochitl, betrayed Return of the Winged One by going against Tecpatl. Her punishment was sedation in order to allow Tecpatl use her bones as materials his grimores uses to attack.


== FranceEdit ==
The Maiden of Versailles (ヴェルサイユの聖女, Verusaiyu no Seijō)
The twin sister of Elizarina, a mysterious blond, blue-eyed sorceress whose name is unknown and is one of the most powerful magicians in Europe. She resides within Versailles, France under house arrest; while it appears that she has lost all political power to the French government, in truth it is a ruse to fool her enemies and she continues to rule the country from the shadows. During the Third World War, she decides to take advantage of the war by leading a French Invasion force to invade England. Both she and her sister descend from both the British and French Royal families and the Maiden of Versailles wields the magical sword Durendal.
Cendrillon (サンドリヨン, Sandoriyon)
Cendrillon is a young blonde magician and a former pawn of GREMLIN. Her appearance and magic revolves around the story of Cinderella. But her magic has a weakness, either by 'sunrise', or the 'stroke of midnight', she is rendered powerless.


== Elizarina Alliance of Independent NationsEdit ==
Elizarina (エリザリーナ, Erizarīna)
A blond, blue-eyed sorceress who rules Elizarina, a country named after herself that has recently gained independence from Russia. She is well loved by her citizens, who revere her as a "Saint" for fighting against the Russians to gain Elizarina's independence. During the Third World War, she agrees to help Tōma and Lessar against Fiamma until they escort Sasha out from her country, as she does not want Elizarina to become involved in the war between Academy City and Russia. However, her palace is attacked by Fiamma and Sasha is captured after her guards, Tōma, and Lessar are defeated. She is the twin sister of the Maiden of Versailles.


== Norse FactionEdit ==


=== GREMLINEdit ===
GREMLIN is a group of magicians that oppose Academy City, and major antagonists of the New Testament series. Their organization name is based on the gremlin, a magical creature that supposedly sabotages airplanes. GREMLIN has a number of followers including other magicians who also desire the destruction of Academy City.
Othinus (オティヌス, Otinusu)
Leader of GREMLIN and current "Magic God", making her the most powerful magician in the series. She destroyed the world using the Lance of Gungnir and tormented Toma by making many worlds for him to drive into suicide, after their fight with Toma, Toma tries to save her by traveling to Denmark and fight against the entire world by retrieving the eye of the magic god from Mímir's Well which is in an old castle in Denmark. After Toma saved her from the entire world she lost all her powers as a Magic God and becomes a freeloader in the Kamijou Residence as a shrunken little fairy for that is her punishment from the entire world for being a Magic God. Her name is Latin for Odin.
Thor (トール, Tōru)
Thor is the representative combat member of GREMLIN who appeared in Academy City requesting Tōma's assistance to save Fräulein Kreutune. It is revealed that his intention behind saving Fräulein Kreutune is to simulate his power growth through real life battles. Thor uses electric arc blades in battle and is able to borrow the appearance of any female. He let Ollerus, who intends to sneak in GREMLIN, borrow his appearance in order to do so and it is unknown whether he will continue his operations as a GREMLIN member after betraying them.
Marian Slingeneyer (マリアン＝スリンゲナイヤー, Marian Suringunaiya)
Marian is a Dvergr and a key member of GREMLIN. Her magic allows her to reform people into objects.
Kagun Kihara (木原 加群, Kihara Kagun)
Kagun is a former scientist and teacher from Academy City and one of the key persons of GREMLIN under the name "Bersi". Kagun died after getting his revenge on Byouri Kihara. Othinus later revived him as an Einherjar.
Mjölnir (ミョルニル, Myoruniru)
A magician in the form of a stone cylinder. Her appearance is because of Marian. Due to her namesake she has the power over thunder.
Útgarða-Loki (ウートガルザ・ロキ, Utogaruza-Roki)
Útgarða-Loki is an illusionist and one of the members sent to Baggage City for Othinus' experiment.
Sigyn (シギュン, Shigyun)
Sigyn is one of the members sent to Baggage City for Othinus' experiment.
Fenrir (フェンリル, Fenriru)
Fenrir is a member of GREMLIN sent to destroy the allied force's secret NORAD base in order to cut off their communication.
Freyja (フレイヤ, Fureiya)
Freyja is a fetus magician who has taken over her mother in order to prevent her mother from dying. She uses summoning magic and eventually ceases being antagonistic when Touma eventually convinced her that she did not need the magic god's power to ensure her mother's safety.
Hel (ヘル, Heru)
Hel is a member of GREMLIN tasked to destroy the allied force's supply ships and routes in order to cease their ammunition supply.
Loki (ロキ, Roki)
Loki is a member of GREMLIN who cunningly managed to deceive world leaders on the true location of Sargasso, leading them to search in the area around Iceland instead.
Jörmungandr (ヨルムンガンド, Yorumungando)
Jörmungandr is a member of GREMLIN who prevented Russian bombers from interfering with the commotion GREMLIN is causing in Tokyo.


=== Ollerus' GroupEdit ===
A group of powerful magicians led by Ollerus in order to obstruct GREMLIN's actions. Their ulterior motive is currently unknown.
Ollerus (オッレルス, Orrerusu)
Ollerus is a mage who once had the chance to become a "majin", a "God of Magic". He is a mysterious fellow whose name is based on the God Ullr, and by far one of the strongest characters in the series. Ollerus wields the power of the Northern Throne, and his power Hliðskjálf has been described as "incomprehensible and inexplicable". He is currently being pursued by various magical organizations seeking his power, but he has managed to elude all of them. His powers are so considerable that when seventh ranked Level 5 esper Gunha fought him seriously, Ollerus only toys with Gunha during the fight. He is in the company of the British Royal Family's Saint, Silvia, who is cruel to him on the surface but still cares for him deeply.
Silvia (シルビア, Shirubia)
Silvia is the head maid of the British Royal Family and also the priestess who passes down the divine right to rule from God to the Royal Family. She left Britain to hone her skills as a maid, and met Ollerus on her travels. While she calls him an idiot and often becomes angry at him for his overly casual attitude and punishes him, she stays with him because she believes that he is an idiot who needs to be cared for. After she completed her training as a maid in Milan, she chose to stay with Ollerus, despite the Royal Family's repeated orders for her to return. She is acquainted with both the Grand Master of the Knights of England and Kaori.
During the events of the World War III, she and Ollerus pick up an almost dying Fiamma, after he was defeated by Aleister.
Brunhild Eikdopr (ブリュンヒルド＝エイクトベル, Buryunhirudo Eikutoberu)
Brunhild is a magician from Finland who is both a Saint and a Valkyrie at the same time. She has a very long and curly blonde hair and wears clothes with a similar fashion to the Valkyries from Norse mythology. She uses a big sword and the replica of Odin's spear Gungnir. As she possesses the quality of a Christian Saint, something deemed to be foreign by the Norse societies, she has been a target to kill since a young age, resulting in lots of people around her killed. She eventually decided to replicate Gungnir hoping to save a boy named Ceillier Flatley who is in comatose due to attempting suicide as a result of the guilt from serving as a tool to make Brunhild mentally suffer under the Five Great Norse Societies, who managed to capture her when both of her powers are in conflict thus cancelling out each other. After recovering her power, she destroyed the Five Great Norse Societies: "Those Who Nurture the World Tree", "The Knowledge Carved Into Iron", "The Champions Rising from the Sea", "Those Who Know the Words of God's Sword" and the "Golden Forged Hammer in the Earth". But was eventually defeated by Kaori after several battles. However, she managed to save Ceillier from his comatose after figuring out the true nature of the magic resulting in his state, and joined Ollerus after his comrades saved her from artificial Valkyries sent by GREMLIN to attack her.


== United States of AmericaEdit ==
Robert Katze (ロベルト＝カッツェ, Roberuto Kattsue)
Robert Katze is the current President of the United States of America who is introduced in volume 3 of Shinyaku Toaru Majutsu no Index where he becomes involved in the magical crisis involving Academy City and the main cast, forming an alliance with Tōma.
Roseline Krackhart (ローズライン＝クラックハル, Rōzurain Kurakkuharuto)
She is the aide to Robert Katze.
Olay Blueshake (オーレイ＝ブルーシェイク, Ōrei Burūsheiku)
Known as "The Media Queen", she is a highly influential businesswoman in America who attempts to take over America and turn it into a theocratic state.
Lindy Blueshake (リンディ＝ブルーシェイク, Rindi Burūsheiku)
Lindy is Olay's daughter who was targeted during the Hawaii Invasion in hopes of using her as a leverage to bargain with Olay. She has since inherited her mother's economical empire after Olay's capture. Even though her company was initially destined for bankruptcy due to requiring to fund repair and reconstructions, it's back in business with the support of multiple several financial investment companies such as Tōya Kamijō's parent company.


== Baggage CityEdit ==
Saflee Opendays (サフリー＝オープンディズ, Safurī Ōpundizu)
Shuri Ōmi (近江 手裏, Ōmi Shuri)
Ayles Bigant (エールズ ビッグアント, Ēruzu Bigguanto)
Grecky Reletsman (グレッキー リレッツマン, Gurekkī Rirettsuman)
Osad Flakehelm (オーサッド＝フレイクヘルム, Ōsaddo Fureikuherumu)


== JapanEdit ==
Tōya Kamijō (上条 刀夜, Kamijō Tōya)
Voiced by: Kenji Nomura (Japanese), Christopher Sabat (English)
Tōma's father. He is a businessman who travels a lot and collects various good luck charms due to Tōma's unnatural streak of bad luck. Though he may seem silly at times but he does cares about his wife and son. He is partly responsible for causing Angel Fall, the spell that threw off a powerful angel in Heaven onto Earth without him knowing about it. In his youth, he was a playboy but fell in love with his future wife Shiina. Despite being happily married with his wife and having no interest in other women, he still manages to attract women, much to the chagrin of his wife.
Shiina Kamijō (上条 詩菜, Kamijō Shiina)
Voiced by: Kikuko Inoue (Japanese), Lydia Mackay (English)
Tōma's mother. She has a gentle personality and cares about Tōma. She commonly uses the phrase "Ara-ara", which is the equivalent of saying, 'My, my" in English. While she is usually seen calm and sweet, she can be jealous if another women is interested in her husband. Since the sports festival, she has become good friends with Misuzu Misaka.
Otohime Tatsugami (竜神 乙姫, Tatsugami Otohime)
Tōma's cousin who is fond of him.
Misuzu Misaka (御坂 美鈴, Misaka Misuzu)
Voiced by: Emi Shinohara (Japanese), Barrett Nash (English)
Mikoto's mother, who is currently studying in college. Due to her youthful looks, she is generally mistaken as Mikoto's older sister. She is aware that her daughter likes Tōma. Since the sports festival, she has become good friends with Shiina Kamijō.
Tabikake Misaka (御坂 旅掛, Misaka Tabikake)
Mikoto's father, who is a rich and prominent business man who meets Tōya during a business trip in one of the Side Story chapters. He has been employed to find and correct flaws in the world and is currently investigating Gemstone espers to prevent them from falling into the hands of governments and agencies unaffiliated with Academy City. Tabikake has numerous connections worldwide and access to Aleister Crowley, whom he does not hesitate to threaten when he suspects that Aleister might use his wife and daughter in his plans.
Ōma Yamisaka (闇咲 逢魔, Yamisaka Ōma)
Voiced by: Jōji Nakata (Japanese), Bob Carter (English)
A Japanese spell caster, who wears a black suit. He uses a magical crossbow, an azusayumi, which amplify the power of his spells. He appears on August 31st where he tries to capture Index as he seeks the contents of a Chinese spell book in her mind to save a woman he loves, who has been cursed to die.
Jinsaku Hino (火野 神作, Hino Jinsaku)
Jinsaku Hino is a serial killer that was introduced in the fourth volume who attempts to kill Tōma and Motoharu. He is first suspected as the caster of Angel Fall because he kept muttering 'Angel' and his appearance did not change. However, it is revealed that he is not responsible for Angel Fall; rather, he had a split personality which left him unaffected by the spell. He does not appear in the anime.
Hajime Hitotsui (一一 一, Hitotsui Hajime)
Voiced by: Kishō Taniyama (Japanese), Mike McFarland (English)
Hajime is a popular idol with a successful singing and acting career. In the anime adaptation, Shiina, Ruiko and Aiho are fans of him.


== OthersEdit ==
Estelle Rosenthal (エステル＝ローゼンタール, Esuteru Rōzentāru)
Estelle is one of the main characters of A Certain Scientific Accelerator a necromancer attempting to stop DA, a rouge Anti-Skill group, from capturing Last Order and adding a new layer to the world.
Archangel Gabriel
Archangel Gabriel is one of the four Archangels of God. Called 'The Power of God' and the protector of the rear side, he was accidentally brought down to earth and switched bodies with Sasha Kruezhev when the Angel Fall spell was cast. Determined to return to Heaven and punish the one responsible for the spell, he joins Tōma and his companions under the alias 'Misha Kruezhev'. Upon learning Tōya was the one responsible, Gabriel/Misha tries to kill him, but is stopped by Kaori until Motoharu destroys the site where the spell was cast and thus sending him back to Heaven.
Archangel Michael
Archangel Michael is one of the four Archangels of God, also called 'the One Equal to God', 'the Regard of God' and 'God's Right Hand.' In the 20th novel, it is revealed that Michael, not Gabriel, was the angel who fell during the Angel Fall incident. Kaori had mistaken Michael for Gabriel due to a mix up in the essences of Heaven by unknown forces, which switched Michael and Gabriel's positions. It is this reason that Fiamma has targeted Sasha, as her body had been the vessel for Misha's essences and powers.


== ReferencesEdit ==