SNK vs. Capcom: Card Fighters 2 Expansion Edition and SNK vs. Capcom: Card Fighters DS redirect here.
SNK vs. Capcom: Card Fighters Clash is a series of SNK Playmore games between 1999 and 2006 for hand-held consoles. It has a collectible card game theme, spun off from the popular series of fighting games by SNK and Capcom, and also including references to many other kinds of games from both companies. The game uses cards based on Capcom and SNK characters from a variety of earlier games. The first two versions of this game were released for Neo-Geo Pocket Color, and a new version for the Nintendo DS was released in 2007.


== SVC: Card Fighter's Clash ==
The first game in the series, released in 1999 for the Neo Geo Pocket Color handheld console, was the first crossover between SNK and Capcom. Characters in the game are illustrated in the super deformed art style. There are two complementary versions of the game: the SNK version and the Capcom version. Each version of the game has a different starting deck and different exclusive cards that can be obtained, but the gameplay remains the same, with card battles resembling a somewhat simplified version of Magic: The Gathering, in which a maximum of three "creatures" (i.e. fighters) are allowed in each player's field at any given moment and there is no mana to be spent to place them in the field (there are, however, Special Points, SP for short, which are gained as fighters are placed in the field and spent as the players use Action Cards - this game's equivalent of Enchantments - or combined attacks).


== SVC: Card Fighters 2 Expand Edition ==
This Japan-only sequel to SVC: Card Fighters' Clash was released in 2001 for the Neo Geo Pocket Color after Capcom vs. SNK 2. In addition to the 240 character and 60 action cards from the first game, 124 new cards are added, adding cast from Garou: Mark of the Wolves, Samurai Shodown: Warriors Rage, The King of Fighters '99 and 2000 for SNK, and Project Justice, Mega Man Legends, Dino Crisis and Onimusha for Capcom, while also including 40 Reaction cards similar that can be used during the opponent's attack. Another new feature is special character cards with alternate versions of various characters depicted with regular artwork instead of the super deformed style. Instead of being released as two versions (SNK and Capcom), this game was released as a single version that lets the players decide to either start with a SNK deck or a Capcom deck. It was the last game to be released for the Neo Geo Pocket Color in Japan.
In 2008, an English translation of the game titled as Card Fighters' Clash 2 (CFC2) was released in the form of a fan translation patch to the original game file. This project is aimed at bringing the second Card Fighters' Clash game to a wider audience.


== SVC: Card Fighters DS ==
This Nintendo DS game was released on December 14, 2006 in Japan and was released on April 24, 2007 in the United States. In addition, there are key features:
ADK characters were added to the SNK side, from games like Aggressors of Dark Kombat, Ninja Master's -Haoh-Ninpo-Cho- and the World Heroes series.
Many newcomers have been added from recent games produced by both companies, such as Capcom's Dante and Phoenix Wright as well as SNK's Yuki and Nagase.
Power Stone characters are absent from the game.
Almost immediately after the American NDS version was released, an unavoidable bug was discovered in the game. The bug occurs on the ninth floor of the tower, during the second play through. The game crashes after talking to an opponent named Jon, who has to be defeated in order to finish the game. On June 6, SNK announced that the replacement cartridge would be available in stores on June 25 and began the process of implementing a recall. These cartridges have been sent by mail along with a package of five King of Fighters trading cards. The recall ended in January 2008. Fixed versions of the game features a black and white graphic behind the title font on the cartridge's label, while bugged versions feature the label in full color. The European version of the game did not contain the above-mentioned glitch.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Orlando, Greg (January 2007). "SNK vs. Capcom: Card Fighters DS". Newtype USA 6 (1): p. 131. ISSN 1541-4817.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link)
Bozon (May 17, 2007). "SNK vs. Capcom Card Fighters DS Review". IGN.  


== External links ==
Archive of the Snk vs Capcom: Card Fighters official website (Japanese)
Archive of the Snk vs Capcom: Card Fighters 2 Expand Edition official website (Japanese)
SNK vs. Capcom: Card Fighter's Clash DS official website (Japanese)
Card Fighters Project website
SNK Vs. Capcom Card Fighters' Clash 2 Expand Edition English translation