The Whalers is a cartoon produced by the Walt Disney Company and released by RKO Radio Pictures on August 19, 1938. The short was directed by David Hand and Dick Huemer. It featured the voices of Walt Disney as Mickey Mouse, Clarence 'Ducky' Nash as Donald Duck and Pinto Colvig as Goofy. It was animated by Ed Love, Marvin Woodward, Art Babbitt, Frank Oreb, Robert Leffingwell, Louie Schmitt, Lee Morehouse, Al Eugster, Josh Meador, Eric Larson, Preston Blair and Milt Schaffer. The music was provided by Albert Hay Malotte, uncredited in the film.


== Plot ==
Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Goofy are on a whaling boat in search of whales. Donald tries to eat a sandwich for lunch, but seagulls bother and harass him to get the sandwich and end up eating most of it. While Donald is preoccupied with fighting off the gulls, a pelican eats the remainder of the sandwich. Meanwhile, Mickey tries to pitch a bucket of water off the ship, but it keeps coming back to him, to his annoyance. Donald and Goofy spot a sleeping whale, but Goofy's efforts to shoot a harpoon keep failing because he doesn't have all the tools needed (at one point, he sets his own bottom on fire). He eventually succeeds in launching the harpoon, but his foot gets caught in it and when the harpoon hits an iceberg he ends up hanging from the line above the whale's head.
Donald rushes to Goofy's rescue, but isn't fast enough and Goofy falls off the line, through the whale's blowhole, and ends up in the whale's mouth. Lighting a match so he can see better, Goofy inadvertently wakes the whale up and it starts to sneeze. A wave comes in through the whale's open mouth and washes Goofy around. He gets blown out of the whale's blowhole and falls back down, his head getting stuck in the blowhole. Meanwhile, Donald falls into the water and is chased by the angry whale back to the ship, where, after Donald is nearly eaten, the whale rams and destroys the ship. Mickey, Donald and Goofy fly through the air and land on a small raft made of the ship's debris. Goofy ends up with a fish in his hands, and, believing it is the whale, says, "He must have shrunk."


== Releases ==
1938 – theatrical release
1981 – "Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck Cartoon Collections Volume One" (VHS)
c. 1983 – Good Morning, Mickey!, episode #3 (TV)
c. 1992 – Mickey's Mouse Tracks, episode #70 (TV)
c. 1992 – Donald's Quack Attack, episode #21 (TV)
1997 – The Ink and Paint Club, episode #1.10: "Mickey, Donald and Goofy: Friends To the End" (TV)
2001 – "Mickey Mouse in Living Color" (DVD)
2010 – Have a Laugh!, episode #14 (TV)
2011 – "Have a Laugh! Volume Three" (DVD)


== References ==


== External links ==
The Whalers at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Whalers at the Internet Movie Database