"Objects in Motion" is an episode from the fifth season of the science fiction television series Babylon 5.


== Synopsis ==
Garibaldi is going through detox having a bad time, when Number One (Marjorie Monaghan) informs him that an assassination attempt will be made on him and Lise. Companies had been strip mining Mars, and didn't want the details to come to light.
A security guard is killed, and his link is switched and later tampered with to provide access to the security net.
Number One talks with Sheridan, and they suspect that Earth is trying to provoke a civil war on Mars.
Zack Allen discovers in Medlab that the link has been switched. Later he orders a loud noise sent to the dead security guard's link, which reveals the would-be assassin who is apprehended.
An assassin trying to take out G'Kar misses when Zack intervenes and hits Lise instead.
Garibaldi forces access to the assassin and takes him to Lyta Alexander, and makes a deal for her to scan him. He finds that he was hired by the board of Edgar Industries.
G'Kar has bought a ship and now prepares to leave.
Garibaldi stays by Lise's side in Medlab, and when she awakes asks her to marry him then and there. She agrees.
Garibaldi talks to the Edgars board, and instructs them to resign, with a threat of a cache of money to be used to track them down in the event of his untimely death. He has information provided by the new head of covert intelligence for the Interstellar Alliance, Number One.
Franklin and Number One have a drink, and reflect on the future. Franklin is leaving for Earth.
Garibaldi and Lise then leave for Mars.
Delenn and Sheridan take a walk from one end of Babylon 5 to the other.


== Arc significance ==
Garibaldi and Lise Hampton are now married.
Number One becomes head of Intelligence for the Interstellar Alliance.


== Production details ==
Harlan Ellison and J. Michael Straczynski wrote the story between them, J. Michael Straczynski wrote the teleplay.


== Quotes ==
G'Kar: I believe when we leave a place, part of it goes with us and part of us remains. Go anywhere in the station, when it is quiet, and just listen. After a while, you will hear the echoes of all our conversations, every thought and word we've exchanged. Long after we have gone our voices will linger in these walls, for as long as this place remains. But I will admit that the part of me that is going, very much will miss the part of you that is staying.


== External links ==
Objects in Motion at The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5