A mafia (pronounced /ˈmɑːfiə/ in American English and /ˈmæfiə/ in British English; Italian pronunciation: [ˈmaːfja]) is a type of organized crime syndicate whose primary activities are protection racketeering, the arbitration of disputes between criminals, and the organizing and oversight of illegal agreements and transactions. Secondary activities may be practiced such as gambling, drug-trafficking, loan sharking, and fraud.
The term was originally applied to the Sicilian Mafia, but has since expanded to encompass other organizations of similar methods and purpose, e.g., "the Russian Mafia" or "the Japanese Mafia". The term is applied informally by the press and public; the criminal organizations themselves have their own terms - e.g., the Sicilian and American Mafia call themselves "Cosa Nostra" and the "Japanese Mafia" calls itself yakuza.
When used alone and without any qualifier, "Mafia" typically refers to either the Sicilian Mafia or the Italian-American Mafia.


== Etymology ==
The word "mafia" originated in Sicily, though its origins are uncertain. The Sicilian adjective mafiusu (in Italian: mafioso), roughly translated, means "swagger," but can also be translated as "boldness, bravado". In reference to a man, mafiusu in 19th century Sicily was ambiguous, signifying a bully, arrogant but also fearless, enterprising, and proud, according to scholar Diego Gambetta. In reference to a woman, however, the feminine-form adjective "mafiusa" means beautiful and attractive.
Sicily was once an Islamic emirate, therefore "mafia" might have Arabic roots. Possible Arabic roots of the word include:
maha = quarry, cave; especially the mafie caves in the region of Marsala, which acted as hiding places for persecuted Muslims and later served other types of refugees.
mahyas (مهياص) = aggressive boasting, bragging
marfud (مرفوض) = rejected
mu'afa = safety, protection
Ma'àfir = the name of an Arab tribe that ruled Palermo.
The public's association of the word with the criminal secret society was perhaps inspired by the 1863 play "I mafiusi di la Vicaria" ("The Mafiosi of the Vicaria") by Giuseppe Rizzotto and Gaetano Mosca. The words Mafia and mafiusi are never mentioned in the play; they were probably put in the title to add a local flair. The play is about a Palermo prison gang with traits similar to the Mafia: a boss, an initiation ritual, and talk of "umirtà" (omertà or code of silence) and "pizzu" (a codeword for extortion money). The play had great success throughout Italy. Soon after, the use of the term "mafia" began appearing in the Italian state's early reports on the phenomenon. The word made its first official appearance in 1865 in a report by the prefect of Palermo, Filippo Antonio Gualterio.


== Definitions ==
A formal definition of "mafia" can be hard to come by. The term was never officially used by Sicilian mafiosi, who prefer to refer to their organization as "Cosa Nostra". Nevertheless, it is typically by comparison to the Sicilian Mafia that other criminal groups earn the label. The expansion of the term has not been welcomed by all scholars. Giovanni Falcone, an anti-Mafia judge murdered by the Sicilian Mafia in 1992, objected to the conflation of the term "Mafia" with organized crime in general:

While there was a time when people were reluctant to pronounce the word "Mafia" ... nowadays people have gone so far in the opposite direction that it has become an overused term ... I am no longer willing to accept the habit of speaking of the Mafia in descriptive and all-inclusive terms that make it possible to stack up phenomena that are indeed related to the field of organized crime but that have little or nothing in common with the Mafia.


=== Mafias as private protection firms ===
Scholars such as Diego Gambetta and Leopoldo Franchetti have characterized the Sicilian Mafia as a "cartel of private protection firms", whose primary business is protection racketeering: they use their fearsome reputation for violence to deter people from swindling, robbing, or competing with those who pay them for protection. For many businessmen in Sicily, they provide an essential service when they cannot rely on the police and judiciary to enforce their contracts and protect their properties from thieves (this is often because they are engaged in black market deals). Scholars have observed that many other societies around the world have criminal organizations of their own that provide essentially the same protection service through similar methods.
For instance, in Russia after the collapse of Communism, the state security system had all but collapsed, forcing businessmen to hire criminal gangs to enforce their contracts and protect their properties from thieves. These gangs are popularly called "the Russian Mafia" by foreigners, but they prefer to use the term krysha.

With the [Russian] state in collapse and the security forces overwhelmed and unable to police contract law, [...] cooperating with the criminal culture was the only option. [...] most businessmen had to find themselves a reliable krysha under the leadership of an effective vor.


=== Mafia-type organizations under Italian law ===
Article 416-bis of the Italian Penal Code defines a Mafia-type association (associazone di tipo Mafioso) as one where "those belonging to the association exploit the potential for intimidation which their membership gives them, and the compliance and omertà which membership entails and which lead to the committing of crimes, the direct or indirect assumption of management or control of financial activities, concessions, permissions, enterprises and public services for the purpose of deriving profit or wrongful advantages for themselves or others."


== International ==
Mafia-proper can refer to either:
American Mafia
Sicilian Mafia


=== Italy ===
Other Italian criminal organizations include:
Camorra, operating in the region of Campania
'Ndrangheta in Calabria
Sacra Corona Unita in Apulia
Stidda and Cosa Nostra in Sicily


=== Other countries ===
Aboriginal-based organized crime
African-American gangs, including
Gangster Disciples
Crips
Bloods

Albanian mafia
Armenian mafia
Aryan Brotherhood
Asian-American gangs, including
Born To Kill
Tiny Rascal gang
Menace of Destruction
Sons of Samoa

Australian mafia
Azeri mafia
British crime firms, including
Liverpool mafia
Clerkenwell crime syndicate
Arif crime family
Thompson crime family

Bulgarian mafia
Cape Verdean organized crime
Chaldean mafia
Chechen mafia
Neo-paramilitary criminal gangs, also called BACRIM, in Colombia
Corsican mafia
Cuban mafia
Dixie Mafia
Dutch mafia, including
Delta crime syndicate
Dutch-Moroccan organized crime
Moluccan Kajahatan

French mafia
Georgian mafia
Greek mafia
Hispanic-American gangs, including
Latin Kings
Ñetas
Trinitarios
Mara Salvatrucha

Indian mafia
Irish mafia
Israeli mafia, including
Abergil crime family

North Korea's illicit activities
Kkangpae
Lebanese crime families, including
Al-Zein Clan
Miri-Clan

Mexican cartels, including
Sinaloa Cartel
Los Zetas
Juárez Cartel
Gulf Cartel

Mexican-American prison gangs, including
Mexican Mafia
Nuestra Familia
Texas Syndicate
Barrio Azteca

Nigerian mafia
No Limit Soldiers
Outlaw motorcycle gangs, including
Hells Angels MC
Outlaws MC
Bandidos MC
Pagans MC
Mongols MC
Satudarah MC

Pakistani mafia
Polish mafia
Russian mafia
Serbian mafia
The Company
Tongs
Triads, including
14K Triad
Sun Yee On
Bamboo Union

Turkish and Kurdish mafia
Ukrainian mafia
VVT
Yakuza
Yardies
Zoe Pound


== References ==


=== Sources ===
Albanese, Jay S., Dilip K. Das & Arvind Verma, (eds.) (2003). Organized Crime. World Perspectives, Prentice-Hall, ISBN 9780130481993
Dickie, John (2007). Cosa Nostra: A History of the Sicilian Mafia. Hodder. ISBN 978-0-340-93526-2. 
Dainotto, Roberto.M (2015). The Mafia: A Cultural History. Princeton University Press. p. 239. ISBN 9781780234434. 
Gambetta, Diego (1993). The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private Protection. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-674-80742-1. 
Gambetta, Diego (2009). Codes of the Underworld. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691119373. 
Glenny, Misha (2008). McMafia. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1400095124. 
Hess, Henner (1998). Mafia & Mafiosi: Origin, Power, and Myth, London: Hurst & Co Publishers, ISBN 1-85065-500-6
Mosca, Gaetano (2014). "What is Mafia." M&J, 2014. Translation of the book "Cosa è la Mafia," Giornale degli Economisti, Luglio 1901, pp. 236–62. ISBN 979-11-85666-00-6
Paoli, Letizia (2003). Mafia Brotherhoods: Organized Crime, Italian Style, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-515724-9
Seindal, René (1998). Mafia: money and politics in Sicily, 1950-1997, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, ISBN 87-7289-455-5
Servadio, Gaia (1976), Mafioso. A history of the Mafia from its origins to the present day, London: Secker & Warburg ISBN 0-436-44700-2