The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 720 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of fifty of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Gold and Silver versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== Chikorita ==
Chikorita (チコリータ, Chikorīta), known as the "leaf" Pokémon, is a small green reptilian Pokémon. It is primarily a pale leaf green color with large red eyes. Its most distinguishing feature is the large leaf on the top of its head, which is usually longer than the rest of its body. It has a "necklace" of small green buds around its neck. Chikorita can spawn vines from its neck and create leaves from the big leaf on its head. Like many Grass-type Pokémon, its foliage emits a sweet odor that has calming properties. This leaf also has the ability to check the temperature and humidity of the surrounding air. Chikorita, like many grass Pokémon, are very laid back.
A special edition Game Boy Color was released featuring Chikorita, Totodile, Cyndaquil, and Pikachu, though the first three were removed in the United States release. Authors Tracey West and Katherine Noll wrote that Ash Ketchum's Chikorita in the anime was "one of his most loyal Pokemon ever" and cited how it evolves into Bayleef in order to protect him. They added that "any Trainer would be proud to have this Grass Pokemon on his team". Bitmob's Jasmine Maleficent Rea, however, called Chikorita the "dumbest-looking Pokémon in the history of dumpy animated animals". Chikorita's unpopularity as a starter may be at least partially because Grass-type moves are not as useful against the first few Johto Gym Leaders.


== Bayleef ==
Bayleef (ベイリーフ, Beirīfu) is the evolution of Chikorita and first appeared in Pokémon Gold and Silver. It has a pale yellow body supported by four legs and a rather long neck and tail. On top of its head is a single large leaf. Its most defining trait is the "necklace" of seven tubular leaves that is located around its neck. Each of these curled up leaves contains inside it a tree shoot. From these leaves wafts a spicy scent that has stimulating properties. It can cheer people up, restore their health, make them more energetic and even heighten their drive for competition.
IGN's Pokémon Chick praised Bayleef and cited its inadvertent use of Body Slam in the anime to injure Ash, stating that "I was very happy with the fact that Bayleef's superior size turned Chikorita's former harmless flirtations into legitimate attacks". West and Noll wrote that Bayleef was "playful" and cited the same example as used by IGN's Pokémon Chick.


== Meganium ==
Meganium (メガニウム, Meganiumu), known as the Herb Pokémon, is the final form of the Chikorita evolutionary line. Meganium is a sauropod-like Pokémon. Instead of having a leaf coming out of its head, like its two previous evolutions, Chikorita and Bayleef, it has stamen-like antennae sprouting from the top of its nose, each with what looks like its own anther. The leaves around its neck seem to have sprouted into a large pink flower with white tips. Meganium has also reverted to the color it was as a Chikorita, whilst Bayleef's main body color had become a beige-color. A female Meganium has shorter antennae. The aroma emanating from Meganium's petals soothes anyone that comes in contact with it. It calms aggressive feelings.
An editor for GamesRadar wrote that it "manages to stay somewhat cute all the way through its progression" which they claim is uncommon among multi-stage Pokémon. They also compared it to the Pokémon Venusaur due to its similar stats. IGN also ranked Meganium as the 87th best Pokémon, commenting that it "may feel like the redheaded stepchild of the Generation II starters sometimes, but he's still awesome. "


== Cyndaquil ==
Cyndaquil (ヒノアラシ, Hinoarashi), known as the Fire Mouse Pokémon, is the Fire-type Starter Pokémon in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal, and its remakes Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver. Its fur is bluish-green on top of its body, but a milky color on the underside. Although called the Fire Mouse Pokémon, Cyndaquil seems to be a composite of features from an echidna and a hedgehog, seen in the flames erupting from its back, and the shrew, a rat and a mouse, the general shape of its body. Its eyes are often closed, as it is still young. It has four red spots on its back from which its flames erupt. Cyndaquil looks like a yellow porcupine. Cyndaquil is usually timid, but is capable of defending itself by using the fire on its back.
A special edition Game Boy Color was released featuring Cyndaquil, Totodile, Chikorita, Pikachu, and Pichu, though the first three were removed in the United States release. 1UP.com wrote that they would have picked Cyndaquil to follow them in HeartGold and SoulSilver. GamesRadar's Raymond Padilla described Cyndaquil as "super cute". IGN's Pokémon Chick found it to be "one of the cuter Pokemon out there". IGN ranked Cyndaquil as the 70th best Pokémon.


== Quilava ==
Quilava (マグマラシ, Magumarashi), known as the Volcano Pokémon, is the evolution of Cyndaquil. Like its pre-evolution, the top half of its body is blue; however, its entire body is slimmer. It also seems to have ears and to have lost its snout that it had as Cyndaquil, and its eyes are open. Its fur is non-flammable, so it can withstand flame attacks. The fire coming from its head and back, which are stronger than Cyndaquil's, can be launched as a flame attack. Quilava is known to be less timid than Cyndaquil, though its behavior appears to be affected by its surroundings. A very common occurrence during evolution is an increase in aggression.
IGN ranked Quilava as the 63rd best Pokémon.


== Typhlosion ==
Typhlosion (バクフーン, Bakufūn), known as the Volcano Pokémon, is the final form of the Cyndaquil evolutionary line. Unlike Cyndaquil, Typhlosion bears no relation to the echidna, instead based on a combination on a wolverine, a badger, a weasel and a rat. The number of special vents it possesses has dropped to the row on its upper back; however, it can put forth a tremendous amount of heat. Typhlosion carries the same coloration of its lower forms. Its yellow fur is brighter than it is on Quilava, yet still duller than Cyndaquil. Its fur is incredibly coarse, dry, and somewhat shaggy, but still fire-proof. This fur, when rubbed together by Typhlosion, can be used to create huge explosions. Far more aggressive than either Cyndaquil or Quilava, Typhlosion are exceedingly hard to find out in the plains. They are a common cause of grass fires as the heat they expel is hot enough to cause the air around them to shimmer. It viciously assaults its opponents, reducing them to ashes with its incredibly hot flames. Though not color-blind, Typhlosion have slightly poorer eyesight than Quilava due to having smaller pupils. They make up for it with a keen sense of smell and remarkable hearing. It creates heat shimmers with intense fire to hide itself.
A GamesRadar editor wrote that while Typhlosion is based on a real life animal, it is "still cool" because the developers "added a creative element to the animals they were originally inspired by". IGN ranked Typhlosion as the 22nd best Pokémon.


== Totodile ==
Totodile (ワニノコ, Waninoko) resembles a small crocodile and has a short blue body with a yellow band on its chest. On its back and tail are four red spikes. Totodile has a big and prominent jaw, filled with many sharp teeth; it is strong enough to cut down a tree. It is very energetic, cheerful and rowdy, and occasionally can be seen running through swampy areas, coastal waters and rainforest waters, biting and chomping at everything that moves.
A special edition Game Boy Color was released featuring Totodile, Chikorita, Cyndaquil, Pikachu, and Pichu, though the first three were removed in the United States release. IGN's Pokémon Chick found Totodile to be her least favourite of the starter Pokémon in Gold and Silver due to the abundance of superior Water type Pokémon though she found it to have "personality to spare". Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Tom East called Totodile a "star veteran" of the series. IGN also ranked Meganium as the 87th best Pokémon, commenting that it "may feel like the redheaded stepchild of the Generation II starters sometimes, but he's still awesome. "

Authors Tracey West and Katherine Noll called it "happy and energetic" and that it has been "making us smile ever since Ash first caught it". They added that "Totodile is a reminder that not only big things come in small packages, but powerful ones, too!". An editor for GamesRadar called it a "cute and cuddly critter".


== Croconaw ==
Croconaw (アリゲイツ, Arigeitsu) is the evolution of Totodile. It opens its huge jaws wide when attacking. If it loses any fangs while biting, new ones will quickly grow back in its place so that it always has 47 fangs. The tips of these fangs are slanted backward. Once Croconaw has clamped its jaws on its foe, it will absolutely not let go. Because the tips of its fangs are forked back like barbed fishhooks, they become impossible to remove when they have sunk in. This means that the prey has no hope of escape. The pattern on Croconaw's belly vaguely resembles a jungle tunic or loincloth. Croconaw live in or around swamps, rainforests and oceans. When they evolve into Feraligatr, they move into an area where there is a waterfall.
After drawing a Croconaw for a group of fans in an effort to draw a minor Pokémon, Tsunekazu Ishihara found that almost no one knew what it was.


== Feraligatr ==
Feraligatr (オーダイル, Ōdairu) is the final form of the Totodile evolutionary line. Feraligatrs are massive, crocodiles and alligators with long, blue bodies and four legs, although they can stand and even walk upright on land. Their appendages have razor sharp claws at the ends, and its jaw is lined with fangs. On its head, back, and tail there are red, jagged scales. Feraligatr are ferocious and have a tendency to lash out at those that come too close, including unskilled trainers.
IGN also ranked Feraligatr as the 26th best Pokémon commenting that it not only does it have "the best portmanteau name in all of Pokémon, but he's also freaking awesome for other reasons, not least of which that he'll kick your Pokémon's ass" and "the greatest crocodilian Pokémon around."


== Sentret ==
Sentret (オタチ, Otachi), known as the Scout Pokémon, has a big round body with stubby arms and two small feet. It has a striped tail which it uses to stand on. It has long black ears, a white ring on its belly, and white paw pads. Sentret has a very nervous and cautious behavior. It will not sleep alone, and usually sleeps while another of its kind watches for danger. Sentret stand on their tails to get a better view, and shriek to warn all Pokémon in the neighbourhood of any possible danger. If one becomes separated from its pack, it becomes incapable of sleep due to fear.
In the video game series, Sentret appear frequently in the grasslands of the Johto and Sevii Islands regions. In the anime, Sentret first appeared in Tanks a Lot!. A young Sentret and Misty's Togepi hi-jacked Team Rocket's Arbo-Tank. Later, the two were rescued by Ash and friends with the help of the young Sentret's family. Chaz used a Sentret to show a demonstration of Iron Tail to Ash's Pikachu in All Things Bright and Beautifly. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Sentret was first seen as a Pokémon under the ownership of Professor Elm. Later, it is seen at Earl's Pokémon Academy in Violet City. Crystal uses it to illustrate the concept of held items, such as berries, to one of the children.
Author Phillip Marcus called Sentret "cute and fuzzy".


== Furret ==
Furret (オオタチ, Ōtachi) live in colonies with tunnels much too small for normal Pokémon to traverse, yet it is a perfect fit for the slim build of Furret as it hides from the outside world at the surface by traversing through these tunnels like gophers. These tunnel colonies become very complex, especially if they are very deep, and can potentially stretch for miles. Occasionally, these colonies are found intertwined with Diglett colonies. Furret evolves from Sentret at level 15. The mother puts its offspring to sleep by curling around them.
Furret’s rudimentary paws and legs are deceptively nimble, making Furret a quick, unpredictable predator especially skillful at hunting Rattata, its main prey. Also, the fur of the Pokémon is thicker than it appears, and Furret can fluff up its fur to make itself look much stronger and larger than it actually is as an intimidation tactic towards potential foes. In the Pokémon universe, one subject that is often argued is where Furret's tail begins.
In Pokémon Stadium 2, Furret stars in its own minigame called "Furret's Frolic". Players must burrow underground and pop out to push the different size Pokéballs in the opponents' goals.
IGN's Jack DeVries called it both a great Pokémon and "probably the best Pokémon".


== Hoothoot ==
Hoothoot (ホーホー, Hōhō) is one of two owl Pokémon. Hoothoot seems to have one foot. However, it actually has two feet; at least one is retracted against its body at almost all times, and Hoothoot can switch between one foot and the other at speeds almost too fast for the human eye. Hoothoot are also known for having precise senses of time, due to a special mechanism in their brain that measures the rotation of the earth. Properly trained, they can be more accurate than all but the most precise of clocks. In nature, they always begin hooting at the same time every night.
It made its debut in Pokémon: the Movie 2000.


== Noctowl ==
Noctowl (ヨルノズク, Yorunozuku) is the second owl Pokémon, being the evolution of Hoothoot. It resembles a horned owl whose plumage is colored in various shades of brown. Its round head has two piercing, red eyes and two large "eyebrows". These eyebrows help balance Noctowl while it is flying to increase its aerodynamics. When hunting, Noctowl puts its prodigious eyesight to good use to hunt down prey without fail. It is also very good at sneaking up to its victims unnoticed thanks to its supple, soft-feathered wings that allow it to fly without making any noise. When a Noctowl needs to ponder especially deep thoughts, it can rotate its head 180 degrees, which serves to increase its intellectual faculties. If it flips its head upside down, it's a sign that it is engaged in very complex thinking.
In the anime, a shiny Noctowl has been part of Ash's team during his travels in Johto. Ash frequently used his Noctowl to explore an area from the sky, or to puncture Team Rocket's hot-air balloon. Ash used it in many battles throughout Johto, but it is currently living in Professor Oak's lab since Ash decided to make a fresh start and leave all of his Pokémon except for Pikachu when he left for Hoenn. It is voiced by Yuji Ueda in both the Japanese and English-language versions of the anime.
A GamesRadar staff member stated that he was attached to it in spite of its poor stats.


== Ledyba ==
Ledyba (レディバ, Rediba) has a red thorax (ladybug) with black spots, a cream-coloured underbelly, six legs and two black antennae. By itself a Ledyba is very timid, to the point of being afraid to move. When Ledyba become part of a swarm, they become much more active and can cluster next to each other for warmth in cold weather. A Ledyba communicates with others through an aromatic fluid excreted from the points where its legs meet its thorax. By subtly changing the fluid's scent, the Ledyba can convey a number of different feelings. The fluid can also help to determine a Ledyba's location as well as its current feelings.
Ledyba made its debut in Pokémon: the Movie 2000.


== Ledian ==
Ledian (レディアン, Redian) is a moderately large, bipedal creature with a huge head and six small limbs. It also has star patterns on its back, which grow larger or smaller depending on the number of stars visible in the night sky. Each spot represents a corner of a star shape. These spots have also been observed glowing red during twilight hours as Ledian are attached to trees, making these trees seem like Christmas trees. Male Ledian are shown having longer antennae than females.
Ledian is a nocturnal insect, active mainly during the night and sleeping in curled-up leaves during the day. Countless Ledian live in outdoor areas located a good distance away from the polluted atmospheres of cities, for the star-lit skies are always clearer in these clean lands than in the light pollution of urban areas. Ledian have an affinity to stars for good reason; They take their energy from the light of the stars in order to live healthily. When many stars are visible, the Ledian will sprinkle a mysterious, glowing powder whilst fluttering about.
GamesRadar ranked Ledian fourth on their list of "Five unintentionally scary Pokémon", noting that its gloves resemble Isotoners which they claim are used by murderers around the world.


== Spinarak ==
Spinarak (イトマル, Itomaru) is a six legged spider-like Pokémon with a marking on its back that is similar to a face. (It particularly resembles the happy-face spider.) It spins a web of fine silk and then waits patiently and with complete motionlessness until prey, such as a bug Pokémon, becomes ensnared in the sticky web. It then waits until nightfall, at which point Spinarak prepares and then devours the prey. The web can be called Spinarak's "second nervous system" because the Pokémon is able to determine the type of prey that has become trapped simply through the vibrations that are created.
In the anime episode "Spinarak Attack", there is a small town whose police force uses Spinarak to fight crime, honoring a Spinarak that had caught a criminal called the Black Arachnid in the past.


== Ariados ==
Ariados (アリアドス, Ariadosu) is the evolution of Spinarak. Ariados is able to spin silk out of both its mouth and rear, which is advantageous against unsuspecting foes. It captures prey by spinning its strong silk around the prey, rendering it helpless to be devoured or carried back to the nest. Ariados' feet end in hooks that allow it to grip well enough to walk on vertical surfaces and on horizontal surfaces upside-down. Ariados uses its nest as a base of sorts. A strand of silk is constantly spun from its rear that leads back to its nest. This allows it to wander in search of food, which it usually does at night. This is in contrast to its unevolved form, Spinarak, which instead waits patiently for its prey to come to its web. An Ariados was used by Annie and Oakley in the movie Pokémon Heroes.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" described Ariados as the "ugliest, nastiest, creepiest, most shudder-inducing Pokémon in existence", due to it being a spider.


== Crobat ==
Crobat (クロバット, Kurobatto) is the evolution of Golbat, evolving with maximum happiness. Its English name is a play on the word "acrobat". It is a purple bat with four wings, with two main wings above and two smaller secondary wings below. The lower wings allow it to fly faster and more silently, but also makes it tough to stop and rest. Its extra wings will even allow it to fly long distances by alternating which set of wings it uses when it tires. The only way it can rest is to hang on a tree branch using its lower legs to grab onto it the way normal bats would.


== Chinchou ==
Chinchou (チョンチー, Chonchī, Chonchie in original Japanese language versions) has a small blue body and two antennae sprouting from its head, both of which have a yellow globe at the end. These antennae are said to have evolved from fins. A Chinchou's eyes are yellow and their pupils have the shape of plus signs. When blinking or closing its eyes, only the vertical parts close, making the pupils look like minus signs. Its habitat is the dark depths of the ocean floor. In the absence of any other light, Chinchou sees its surroundings and communicates by shooting positive and negative charged electricity particles between the tips of its antennae, creating an electric current and thus light. This can be said to be a form of bioluminescence. The charges Chinchou shoots between its antennae can also be used offensively, to stun its opponents with a flash of light or shock them with electricity.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called Chinchou cute, though adding that "the way his eyes are both crosses is a little weird".


== Lanturn ==
Lanturn (ランターン, Rantān, Lantern in original Japanese language versions) uses the bright part of its body, which gradually evolved from a dorsal fin, to lure prey. Given the nickname "deep-sea star", the light it emits is so bright that it can illuminate the sea's surface from a depth of over 3 miles. It uses this light to attract and blind prey, and then swallows the immobilized prey in a single gulp. The light is also useful for Lanturn to navigate through the deep, murky waters. Much like an anglerfish, the light from its antenna is produced by bacterial symbiosis. Bioluminescent bacteria in Lanturn's antenna cause a chemical reaction with Lanturn's bodily fluids to create the bright light. Lanturn's HP is high compared to its other stats.


== Pichu ==

Pichu (ピチュー, Pichū), known as the "Tiny Mouse" species of Pokémon, are the pre-evolved version of Pikachu. Its fur is very short, and it has bright yellow coloration. The tips of its large ears are black, and it has additional black markings on its neck and short tail. They are not skilled at storing electricity, so when amused or startled, they often discharge jolts of electricity strong enough to affect adult humans, and may even electrocute themselves. This lack of control becomes more stable as they grow older. The electricity that they do manage to keep stored is limited by their small electrical pouches in their cheeks. On stormy days or days with arid climate, they charge much more easily, leaving the sound of crackling static electricity emanating from them. They play with each other by touching tails to set off sparks, which also acts as a test of courage. However, they run the risk of shorting each other out, and scaring themselves into a crying fit with the flash of sparks that emanates from them.
In an interview, Junichi Masuda noted that he and Ken Sugimori wanted to create a Pokémon to be the "next" Pikachu, but were initially having a difficult time creating a design that they felt would be as appealing. After long discussion, they decided to create a Pokémon that evolved into Pikachu, and Sugimori developed Pichu as a result. In the same interview, Masuda noted that Pichu was a Pokémon "close to his heart" due to the "well thought out" design process. In another interview, Masuda stated that Pichu is his favorite Pokémon.
Pichu first appeared in Pokémon Gold and Silver, and is one of many pre-evolutions introduced into the series. It was one of the earliest Pokémon revealed for Gold and Silver, including Cleffa and Igglybuff. Pichu has since appeared in every subsequent main Pokémon title. Pichu also appears in other Pokémon titles, including Pokémon Channel, Pokémon XD: Gale of Darkness, Pokémon Pinball: Ruby & Sapphire, Pokémon Trozei!, the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, the Pokémon Ranger titles, "Pokémon: DP Battle Dimension" and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure. At one point, a Nintendo GameCube game called Pichu Bros: Party Panic was in development but never released, featuring Pichu as the main character. Instead, the game was integrated into Pokémon Channel as an important part of the story-line. In Pokémon Stadium 2 Pichu stars in the mini-game "Pichu's Powerplant". Pichu makes a prominent appearance in Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs where it is nicknamed "Ukelele Pichu" as the sidekick to the player's character. Pichu is also an unlockable character in Super Smash Bros. Melee. It has a "cloned" moveset to Pikachu's, but unlike Pikachu, electric attacks that Pichu uses will cause it to take damage. In Pokémon Pinball: Ruby and Sapphire, Pichu will assist Pikachu on Ball-Saver duty for 50 coins or as a prize in the slot machine.
Pichu's debut appearance in the anime was in The Apple Corp, where many were stealing apples from an apple orchard. The Pichu Brothers are a pair of Pichu who have appeared in several anime shorts, including Pikachu & Pichu, Camp Pikachu, several episodes of Pokémon Chronicles, and the Pokémon Channel special Pichu Bros. in Party Panic. One has a scruff of fur while the other does not. "Spiky-Eared Pichu", appeared in Arceus and the Jewel of Life. She helped Pikachu and Piplup find the keys for the jail cell that held Ash, Dawn, Brock, and Damos. "Ukulele Pichu" appeared in the Pokémon Ranger: Tracks of Light anime special. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Gold owns a Pichu that came from an egg produced by Red and Yellow's Pikachu. It hatches when Gold believes that Professor Oak had given him an ability which causes it to hatch. It used a thunder attack and managed to crack the GS ball which helped Celebi. In the Emerald arc, it teamed up with its parents, to use Volt Tackle on the Kyogre created by Guile Hideout's wish.
A Pikachu and Pichu-themed Game Boy Color was released by Nintendo. A Pikachu-colored Pichu was available for download using Mystery Gift that, when taken to the Ilex Forest in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, unlocks a Spiky-eared Pichu.
GameSpot editor Frank Provo called Pichu "cute". UGO Networks criticized Pichu as having lost its popularity before the release of Super Smash Bros. Melee, with its only redeeming quality being its resemblance to Pikachu. Destructoid's Jonathan Holmes wrote that he was "pumped to get these two cute little bastards" in reference to two promotional Pichus. A staff member for IGN wrote that Pichu was "sure to rival Marill and Pikachu as the new favorite". IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that while some people say it's "cuter than Pikachu", she found it "more worthless than Pikachu". She also described it as "stomach-turningly adorable or overmarketed". IGN's Kristine Steiner wrote that the Ukelele Pichu found in Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs was "damned cute". Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Thomas East wrote that the "best thing about this [Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs] is that you'll be assisted by Ukelele Pichu". Gamer Tell's Jenni Lada wrote that the Ukelele Pichu was "incredibly adorable".


== Cleffa ==
Cleffa (ピィ, Pii, Py), known as the Star Shape Pokémon, are very small pink creatures that are vaguely star-shaped in appearance. They resemble a chibi Clefairy with their pink bodies and brown ears. They also have a curl on their forehead and a small tail; however, they do not have the small wings that their evolutions have. Cleffa, like its evolutions, are known to benefit in some way by dancing in the moonlight. Cleffa can also gain nutrients by drinking dew water. Sightings of this Pokémon always increase during meteor showers, so people believe that it arrives on said meteors. When they do show up, they dance the night away. As with their evolved forms, Cleffa live in mountainous regions; especially on Mt. Moon.
Cleffa first appears in Pokémon Gold and Silver, as a pre-evolution of Clefairy. In Pokémon Stadium 2, Cleffa appears in a quiz-show styled mini-game alongside Igglybuff. A series of Pokémon parade across the screen and players have to count how many times certain Pokémon species go across. In Wish Upon a Star Shape, a Cleffa fell from a spaceship that belonged to the kleptomaniac Clefairy from Clefairy Tales. Ash and friends had to get the Star Shape Pokémon back to its group before Team Rocket and the Pokémon Mystery Club could get their hands on it.


== Igglybuff ==
Igglybuff (ププリン, Pupurin) resembles a small pink balloon. It has a round body with four tiny appendages. On top of its head there is a tuft, and on its forehead a counter-clockwise swirl. Like its evolutions Jigglypuff and Wigglytuff, Igglybuff's body shares many properties with a balloon. It is very soft, elastic and flexible, somewhat like a marshmallow. This enables it to bounce a long way, to the extent that Igglybuff finds it more efficient to move around by bouncing instead of walking on its two short legs. Igglybuff is able to bounce, but once it starts, it is hard to stop.
Although Igglybuff too has the notorious singing ability of its evolutionary chain, its vocal cords are not yet fully developed in this early stage of its life. A prolonged singing effort results in Igglybuff turning a deeper and deeper pink as it strains itself, finally ending up damaging its throat. Igglybuff tends to gargle with clear saltwater to soothe itself. Igglybuff is first introduced in Pokémon Gold and Silver as one of several of the pre-evolved Pokémon introduced in the game.


== Togepi ==

Togepi (トゲピー, Togepī), known as the Spike Ball Pokémon, is a baby Pokémon that is considered a symbol of good luck. Togepi is a small, light yellow Pokémon with a round body that is still encased in its egg shell. It has red and blue rings on it, suggesting that its real body has the same pattern. Togepi has stubby hands and round feet with two toes each. It has black eyes and five spikes on its head. Togepi is filled with joy, because it is able to store the positive energy of others, and release it to those in need of it. Making a sleeping Togepi stand up is said to bring happiness. He evolves when leveled up with high friendship.


== Togetic ==
Togetic (トゲチック, Togechikku, Togechick in original Japanese language versions) is a highly auspicious species. It is associated with good fortune and happiness, but it is said that it will grant its boons and affection only to kind-hearted, caring people. In fact, it will even grow sad itself if it is in mean-spirited company for a prolonged period of time. Togetic's rudimentary wings do not permit it to actually fly, but it has in lost time learned to remain floating in midair without even using them. In the new Diamond and Pearl games, Togetic is granted an evolution, Togekiss, using the Shiny Stone.
In the anime episode A Togepi Mirage! in season seven within the Advanced Generation, Misty travels to Hoenn to meet up with Ash, Brock, May, and Max. Due to one of Team Rocket's plans going wrong, they end up in "Mirage Kingdom", a place where people praise Togepi for they believe it will be their savior. Togepi ends up going into a mirage, followed by Ash and his crew, to discover a Togepi Paradise in ruins. To defend it, it evolves into a Togetic, a Pokémon that makes its first Anime appearance and defeats the villain of "Mirage Kingdom". It then makes the difficult decision of staying in the Togepi Paradise to protect it instead of continuing with Misty. In the end, Misty released Togetic so it can defend Mirage Kingdom, parting with a Pokémon she has had for most of the series' original generation.


== Natu ==
Natu (ネイティ, Neiti, Naty in original Japanese language versions) are very small, spherical, green birds with underdeveloped, textured wings, red talons, red tail feathers, and a red plume on each of their foreheads. Since their wings are not fully grown, Natu are unable to fly and therefore must hop around in order to get around. As a result of this, however, Natu’s jumping abilities are quite developed and they can hop great distances. They are diurnal herbivores that live in savanna areas. They forage for food on the ground by custom, but when a lack of food on the ground is apparent, Natu turn to the trees that grow in the savannas. With their strong jumping ability in their talons, Natu may either charge forward and quite literally run up the trunk of a small tree to reach a branch or use both their legs and their flapping wings to propel themselves onto higher tree branches well over seven feet off the ground. Once there, they peck at and feed on the tree’s recently grown shoots.
Whenever Natu are seen, they always appear to be staring at something. When a human makes eye contact with a Natu, the Pokémon will unfailingly stare back intently at him or her without hopping to safety, even though humans in comparison should be intimidatingly large. However, if that human moves even slightly, the Natu will suddenly hop away to safety.
In the anime, when Ash along with his friends attended the Twinleaf Festival, they explore a tent that supposedly shrinks them down so that Pokémon are a much larger size than they are. While in this "dream", a Natu is seen continuously and Barry, Brock, Ash, and Dawn decide to follow it, which eventually leads them together.


== Xatu ==
Xatu (ネイティオ, Neitio, Natio in original Japanese language versions) has a colorful and elaborate plumage with two red eyes imprinted on its breast, making the Pokémon look like a Native American totem pole. In Pokémon Diamond and Pokémon Pearl, male Xatu have three yellow stripes along its lower area, while female Xatu only have two. It possesses the power of precognition, rendering it able to see into the past and the future. It often remains motionless for an entire day staring at the sun while it views the past and present. It will also meditate from morning to sunset without moving. Xatu is said to be overwhelmed by the visual feedback of seeing two different time periods at once, or in terror at seeing the perils the future holds. In the game it is said that in some South American countries, Xatu is highly revered as a mystical Pokémon for its abilities.


== Mareep ==
Mareep (メリープ, Merīpu) are blue skinned sheep or lamb-like creatures which have long, striped tails with a yellow ball at the tip. Their fleece is yellow, while their bodies are a dark blue color. Their ears are a rounded cone shape and channel the electricity that they keep in their fleece. Mareep are said to build up a stockpile of static electricity by rubbing the fluffy woolen fleece on their body, with that of other Mareep. The electricity is then stored in their fleece, and will shock predators on contact. The more electricity that is stored, the brighter the ball on the tip of a Mareep's tail is thought to glow. In summer, the fleece is fully shed, but would grow back within a week. Mareep also are thought to store air in the fleece, enabling it to control its body temperature whatever the weather. Its name is an anagram of ampere, in allusion to its electrical nature.
Various GamesRadar staff members theorized on its name and origin; one theorized that its name was a combination of Mary from Mary Had a Little Lamb and the animal sheep, while another felt that it could be derived from the book Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? due to its Electric type; however, the first noted that it is rare of Nintendo to base a Pokémon on "something western".


== Flaaffy ==
Flaaffy (モココ, Mokoko) is the evolution of Mareep. Flaaffy is dark pink in color. Its fleece is white, and it grows over the top half of its body and its head. It has black stripes on its ears and its long tail, and it has small, beady eyes that look like black dots. It has a blue ball on the tip of its tail. Flaaffy usually likes to sit upright, although it can stand on two legs if necessary. Its wool quality changes as it matures so that it can generate a high amount of strong static electricity while still having a small amount of wool. Its bare, electric-resistant, parts of its hides enable it to prevent electrocution. As a result of storing too much, it develops patches even where wool won't grow.


== Ampharos ==
Ampharos (デンリュウ, Denryū), known as the Light Pokémon, are powerful creatures that gain the ability to stand upright full-time upon evolution from Flaaffy. However, they subsequently lose what remaining wool they have and gain both elongated necks and a primarily yellow coloration, thus resembling a cross between a sheared sheep and a giraffe. Like their previous stages, they retain stripes on theirs ears and tail while gaining stripes on their neck as well as a single nail on each foot. Ampharos also have two round crystal-like structures; one on their heads and one on their tails. These give off huge amounts of light and electricity. Ampharos gives off so much light that it can be seen even from space. People in the old days used the light of this Pokémon to send signals back and forth with others far away. The tail's tip shines brightest. It acts as a beacon for lost people. In Pokémon X and Y, Ampharos is one of few Pokémon capable of undergoing Mega Evolution, becoming part Dragon-type in the process while simultaneously gaining a mass of wool on its head and tail.
Jasmine, the Olivine City gym leader in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal, owns an Ampharos named Amphy that illuminates the Glitter Lighthouse in Olivine City. Amphy is initially sick and Jasmine would not allow a gym battle until it was cured. Strangely, however, Amphy is not a member of Jasmine's team in the gym battle. In the anime, Jasmine has an Ampharos that lights up the Shining Lighthouse in Olivine City. It was sick, so Ash and his friends went to Cianwood Island to pick up medicine. This Ampharos was named Sparkle in the dub. Ampharos has since then appeared many times, with its latest appearance showing it help drive a train by using its electricity. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Jasmine again has an Ampharos that was rescued with her from the Tin Tower by Gold and Silver.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" stated that Ampharos had "more cumulative requests for this thing than any other Pokemon save Mewtwo" to have an analysis of it.


== Bellossom ==
Bellossom (キレイハナ, Kireihana) is a diurnal plant Pokémon. It evolves from Gloom if exposed to a Sun Stone. Bellossom's petals can rotate, and they usually do when it is absorbing sunlight. The color of their leaves vary from a sickly brown and gray to a fluorescent yellow and red, depending on how much sunlight it has absorbed in the past few hours. When its petals are moving, either due to rotating or dancing, they rub together to make relaxing, bell-like sounds. The petals on its head also create a sweet scent. It has a lime green body with rosy cheeks, two big red flowers on its head, resembling pigtail buns and a green and yellow grass skirt, giving it the appearance of a hula dancer.
It is also noted that a Bellossom will be even more beautiful if it was an especially rancid Gloom. The worse it smells as a Gloom, the prettier its petals will be as a Bellossom. Although naturally a peaceful and friendly Pokémon, it can be very territorial and violent fights can break out if there is an intruder or a challenger. It will fiendishly spread pollen and toxins from its flowers. Despite this, it is very social in areas outside of its self-determined territory, and the most common time to find a group of Bellossom together is when they all meet in one location to dance. It is said that these dances summon the sun.
A group of Bellossom danced in one of the opening shorts in Pokémon: the Movie 2000.
Bellossom makes an appearance in the Super Smash Bros. series since Melee. When released from a Poké Ball, it uses Sweet Scent, putting nearby opponents to sleep.
Its Japanese name, "Kireihana", translates to "Beautiful" (kirei) and "Flower" (hana).


== Marill ==
Marill (マリル, Mariru, Maril in original Japanese language versions), known as the Aqua Mouse Pokémon, is a small blue mammalian Pokémon. It has a nearly spherical shape with a white underside (belly) and round ears. It also possesses a wiry black tail with a blue "bubble" on the end which contains oil that allows it to float. It has water-repellent fur that allows it ease of swimming and reduces friction with the water. This Pokémon is normally found in and around fresh water. Marill's diet mainly includes plants that grow near or in rivers, including river weeds.
In Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, the rival owns a Marill, and it is seen during multiple cut-scenes. In Super Smash Bros. Melee, Marill appears as a summon and when released from a Poké Ball, will immediately start running in the direction the ball was thrown. Any opponents in the way will be juggled with its Tackle attack. In the anime, Marill first appeared in Pikachu's Vacation. It was causing trouble for Pikachu and co. along with a Raichu, Snubbull, and Cubone. Tracey, the Pokémon Observer from the Orange Islands, has a Marill which he uses on multiple occasions, often relying on the Marill's hearing to locate Pokémon to sketch. Marill has had many other appearances, with the most notable being as Lyra's main Pokémon.
Because of its resemblance to Pikachu and early-unveiling without a stated name, the character was initially referred to as "Pikablu" by fans and the media. This led to speculation amongst fans after its appearance in Pokémon: The First Movie that it was an evolved form of Pikachu that would appear in Pokémon Yellow, until debunked by IGN. GameSpot editor Frank Provo and Kotaku's Patricia Hernandez have described Marill as "cute".
In Pokémon X and Y, Marill gains the new Fairy-type as a second typing.


== Azumarill ==
Azumarill (マリルリ, Mariruri, Marilli in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Marill. Azumarill resembles a blue, bipedal rabbit with a large, ellipsoid body, long blue ears with red insides, and a blue ball on the end of its thin, elastic black tail. The white bubble-like pattern on its lower stomach helps it to camouflage itself from potential predators when it is in the water.
Azumarill's long ears act as sensors to identify sounds even in fast running rivers. Otherwise, when alone, Azumarill plays in water as a natural pastime, though it must roll up its elongated ears to prevent the sensitive sensory membranes inside from getting wet. The ball at the end of its tail can act as a sensor and guide it while under water. It can make thick, liquid balloons out of thin air with the saliva-water stored in its body. If it spots a drowning Pokémon in any body of water, it fashions such air balloons and jumps in to give the troubled Pokémon air balloons to help it breathe.
In the Pokémon anime, Paul owned an Azumarill which he used in a gym battle against Roark. Although it knew powerful Water attacks like Hydro Pump, it lost to Roark's Geodude, which prompted Paul to give it to a Pokémon trainer passing by, disappointed by its lack of strength.
Although Azumarill's base offenses are low, the ability Huge Power permanently doubles its Attack, granting an extreme boost to physical moves like Aqua Tail and Waterfall. It does not extend to special moves like Hydro Pump, something Paul might not have been aware of.
In Magical Pokémon Journey an Azumarill is a ninja teacher of a girl Apricot and Azumarill`s daughter Marimaru.


== Sudowoodo ==
Sudowoodo (ウソッキー, Usokkie), known as the Imitation Pokémon, is a bending, bipedal creature that resembles a tree trunk. It has a double-pronged protuberance on its head which is larger on a male than it is on a female. It also has tiny feet, a simple face, and a pair of three-fingered hands where the fingers are green spheres resembling leaves on a tree. Although Sudowoodo pretends to be a tree, its body is made not out of wood, but rock, possibly a reference to petrified wood. Since water erodes stone, it greatly dislikes water, and seems to disappear in the rain. It uses its appearance as a form of camouflage, hiding among forest areas to avoid being attacked by enemies. In the winter seasons, when trees are either white with snow or have had their leaves fall off from autumn, Sudowoodo is easy to spot as a fake because its hands remain green, making winter a more dangerous time for Sudowoodo to be in the presence of foes. Ken Sugimori notes that when given the guidelines for creating Sudowoodo by Gold and Silver‍ '​s scenario designer, he was told to create "a Pokémon that blocks the roads". After developing many images as ideas, he discussed them with the scenario designer before selecting Sudowoodo's finished design.
Sudowoodo first appears in the video games Pokémon Gold and Silver as well as its remakes Pokémon Crystal, HeartGold, and SoulSilver. In it, it appears as a tree at first sight until it is alerted to the player's presence after being sprayed with a Squirtbottle. It has since appeared in every main Pokémon title, most notably in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl where it was given a pre-evolution called Bonsly. Outside of the main series, Sudowoodo appears in Pokémon Channel, Pokémon Trozei!, the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, the Pokémon Ranger titles, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure and its sequel, PokéPark 2: Wonders Beyond. In Super Smash Bros. Melee, Sudowoodo appears as both an aspect of a Pokémon-themed area called "Poké Floats" as well as a collectible trophy, which is obtained upon unlocking said stage.
In the anime, Sudowoodo first appeared in the 162nd episode (Type Casting) of the original series. Two Pokémon researchers were arguing whether Sudowoodo was a Grass- or Rock-type. Sudowoodo's main role in the anime starts when Brock captures a Bonsly in the episode From Cradle to Save, while Ash, May, Max and himself are training at a ninja school in the Kanto Battle Frontier. Bonsly evolves into Sudowoodo to help free Brock and a Nuzleaf, defeating James's Carnivine in a battle. A shiny golden colored Sudowoodo appeared in an episode named All That Glitters is Not Golden. A boy named Keenan experimented on his Sudowoodo to make it strong against Water and it turned golden, much to Sudowoodo's consternation.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a Sudowoodo disguises itself as a tree in the middle of Route 37, hiding from a Rhydon. Gold convinced Sudowoodo not to run away from its problems, and Sudowoodo went on to defeat Rhydon in hand-to-hand combat. It soon after joined Gold's team and participated in his friendly match against Silver, and later the Masked Man. A Sudowoodo is captured by Emerald at the Battle Frontier. In the Magical Pokémon Journey manga, Pikachu and Clefairy battle a Prince Sudowoodo of the Stone Kingdom because he has ordered his underlings to kidnap Princess Bellossom of the Flower Kingdom, as he intends to marry her. In Pokémon Gold & Silver: The Golden Boys, Gold and Whitney battle a giant Sudowoodo which is blocking Route 36 in A Huge Mysterious Tree!!. After defeating it in battle, Gold captures it, and it becomes one of his party members.
IGN described Sudowoodo as a "fine example" of how Pokémon designs have become increasingly stranger as the series progressed. IGN wrote that Sudowoodo was "quite rare" in Gold and Silver. IGN's Pokémon Chick called Sudowoodo "odd (to say the least)". CVG called it "one of the coolest of the new Pokémon" introduced in Pokémon Gold and Silver. Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Thomas East included Sudowoodo's name in a list of the five best Pokémon names because it makes him laugh. Prima Games described Sudowoodo's name as "silly". GamesRadar's Darryl Vassar wrote that "there are few Pokémon weirder than Sudowoodo". Game Informer and UGO Networks both included Sudowoodo on their own top lists of trees in video games; UGO specifically wrote that it was odd that no one in the game figured out that it was not a tree.


== Politoed ==
Politoed (ニョロトノ, Nyorotono), a frog Pokémon, is an alternate evolution of Poliwhirl that is obtained by trading it to another player with a King's Rock. Politoed has green skin which turns yellow at its paws, lower jaw and belly. Its belly is adorned with a green spiral mark, similar to its pre-evolutionary forms. On top of its head grows a long blue strand of hair that is curled in a manner similar to the spiral. Politoed dominates over its related species. When Poliwags and Poliwhirls hear its cry, they come running to its side from far and wide. Its status is displayed in the form of its single blue curly hair, which is an object of reverence among its "subjects." The longer and more curled the hair, the better respected the Politoed who supports it. Politoed hunts prey with its long tongue, in similar manner to an actual frog.
In the anime, Politoed is one of the Pokémon used by Misty. She obtained it when her Poliwhirl was withdrawn in its Poké Ball while holding the King's Rock Ash had previously won as a Pokémon sumo tournament prize. Misty's Politoed is strong and cheerful. It is frequently seen joyfully dancing around.
Politoed gained fame in the competitive community due to its hidden ability, Drizzle, which permanently changed the weather to rain. As of Pokémon X and Y, the rain summoned by Drizzle is no longer permanent.


== Hoppip ==
Hoppip (ハネッコ, Hanekko, Hanecco in original Japanese language versions) are small, spherical creatures, with long leaves protruding from their head, it is also pinkish in color. They have small, gripping feet and ears disproportionate to their body, used to listen for winds. Hoppip have extremely petite and almost weightless bodies, and are susceptible to strong winds due to this. When a Hoppip feels a gale approaching, it will lock the leaves on its head with the leaves of other Hoppip, in an attempt to avoid being blown away. If a Hoppip is by itself when in heavy winds, it may grip the ground with its feet to prevent this. Despite the dangers Hoppip face in strong winds, they enjoy gentle breezes and can float in the calmest of winds, which can carry them across vast distances.
Hoppip makes a cameo appearance in the Pokémon Stadium 2 stage in Super Smash Bros. Brawl.


== Skiploom ==
Skiploom (ポポッコ, Popokko, Popocco in original Japanese language versions) is the evolution of Hoppip. Skiploom is somewhat similar to its previous form, albeit larger, and green. It has long dog-like ears, rather than the Cat-like ones of Hoppip. The leaves have turned into a large yellow flower. The flower on its head blossoms at 64 degrees Fahrenheit. As the temperature increases, the flower gradually opens further. This allows Skiploom to be used as a thermometer. It is capable of floating in the air, a skill it uses to get closer to the sun in order to better absorb the sunlight. When the sunlight is strong, its ability, Chlorophyll, increases its speed. When it rains, the flower instantly closes and Skiploom hides under a tree to avoid getting wet.


== Jumpluff ==
Jumpluff (ワタッコ, Watakko, Watacco in original Japanese language versions) is the final form of the Hoppip evolutionary line. Its body is a blue circle with three cotton balls around and has two small red eyes. They are a migratory species Pokémon. They take advantage of their light weight and fluffy, buoyant cotton balls to take to the skies. They are very adept at catching the warm southern winds and navigating their way to any location in the world, typically overseas and until they encounter a cold air current, whereupon they will begin landing. While floating, Jumpluff release spores that propagate its offspring around the world. This method of reproduction is reminiscent of dandelions.
It is also a character in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team. It asks Team Shifty to recover its friend who was trapped in Silent Chasm.


== Aipom ==
Aipom (エイパム, Eipamu, Eipam in original Japanese language versions) resembles a purple squirrel monkey with its face forever frozen in a maniacal grin similar to that of the cymbal banging monkey toy that can be described as rictus and a blank stare from its round eyes. On its thin tail is a three fingered hand-like appendage that is very dexterous. It provides both propulsion and balance while Aipom leaps from tree to tree. Aipom is not aggressive by nature and will attempt to tire its natural opponents through dexterous dodging of the opponent’s attacks in hope that the enemy will be discouraged and leave. Otherwise, if the enemy is persistent, the Aipom will try to retreat, but if it is unable to, it will attack by diving at its opponent from the trees. It also appears to be based on an exaggeration of a prehensile tail, that some species of monkey, such as the Spider Monkey, exhibit.
In the anime, an Aipom steals Ash's hat, and follows his group around until Ash battles and captures it. Ash's Aipom is quite attached to him, getting incredibly jealous when it sees Pikachu on Ash's shoulder . Aipom has the distinction of being the only Pokémon aside from Pikachu that Ash brought with him to Sinnoh, although inadvertently. Aipom seems to enjoy contests.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" was bewildered by its appearance, describing it as a "freakin' purple monkey with a hand coming out of his butt". GamesRadar ranked Aipom along with Croagunk fifth on their list of "Five unintentionally scary Pokémon," noting that their permanent large smiles are unwavering and scary.


== Sunkern ==
Sunkern (ヒマナッツ, Himanattsu, Himanuts in original Japanese language versions) are small,seed like. yellow-and-brown creatures with green leaves protruding from their heads. Sunkern's entire life is centered around its evolution into a Sunflora. It moves as little as possible, trying to preserve the energy and nutrients it requires for the evolution process. According to the Pokédex, Sunkern's diet is said only to be morning dew, which collects under the leaves of plants beneath it. It suddenly falls out of the sky in the morning. A year after a cold summer, their population explodes. The natural enemy of a Sunkern is Spearow as their only form of protection is shaking their leafy heads.
Sunkern is infamous for having the lowest overall base stats of any Pokémon.


== Sunflora ==
Sunflora (キマワリ, Kimawari) is the evolved form of Sunkern. Sunflora is a diurnal sunflower Pokémon; unlike its unevolved form Sunkern, it is wholly inactive at night. However, it is very active and playful during the day when the sun is bright. Like Bellossom, it evolves using a Sun Stone. Sunflora prefer hot climates; their foliage becomes more colorful and elaborate as the temperature rises. Sunflora unfurl their petals and absorb sunlight for energy. It is possible for a Sunflora to absorb too much sunlight, though. When this happens, its head and petals become engorged and very heavy, which is dangerous for a Sunflora, since it can wilt and possibly get sick. At night, the petals are furled, covering Sunflora's face. A Sunflora is constantly soaking up sunlight and moving around in a blissful fashion. In preparation for winter, Sunflora will migrate to warmer and sunnier areas, so as not to lose the vital source of their energy. Sunflora like to live in flower patches. They do their best to stay hidden among the other flowers, but usually they are very noticeable.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Time and Darkness, Sunflora is portrayed as a happy and intelligent female character. She volunteers to join Chimchar and Piplup on the way to the cavern.
GamesRadar described Sunflora as a flower with a grin drawn on with magic marker, they also compared it to the TV show The Magic Garden which featured a giggling flower patch. They also named it on their list of fugly Pokémon, noting that it is completely uninspired and appears that someone has just thrown a smiley face on a sunflower.
A GamesRadar editor noted that he only picked Sunflora because he felt obligated to have a Grass type, but felt that he would not use it in his party again. He added that it "looked stupid". Another GamesRadar editor felt that its eyes looked weird and that she would have gone without a Grass type instead.


== Yanma ==
Yanma (ヤンヤンマ, Yanyanma) physically resembles a dragonfly. It has a large green head on a long red thorax, six legs and two pairs of wings. Its head has a pair of segmented eyes and two red spikes on top. Yanma has extremely well developed wing muscles; in fact, they can generate enough force to break glass by means of the resulting shockwave. Frightened Yanma have been recorded as breaking the sound barrier. Yanma is aided when hunting by its prodigious flying ability; it navigates so perfectly that it can abruptly change direction in mid-flight without slowing down. Its eyes can see 360 degrees without moving its head. It won't miss its prey, even if the prey is behind it. In the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series, it was granted an evolved form, Yanmega, which is owned by Team Rocket's Jessie.


== Wooper ==
Wooper (ウパー, Upā) are similar to axolotl. They are light cyan-colored Pokémon with a pear shaped body, round feet, no arms, and a long tail. Their simplistic face consists mainly of a large mouth and small, black eyes. They have purplish barbed gills on the sides of their head. Three purple, though sometimes shaded blue or pink, crescent shaped gills are on its stomach. Wooper will usually live in cold water: however, they occasionally come out onto land in search of food. When doing so, they coat their bodies with slimy, poisonous film. Touching the slime with bare hands will cause a shooting pain. When the temperature cools in the evening, Wooper emerge from water to seek food along the shore. Male Wooper have two barbs on their head gills, while female Wooper have one barb. Males also have larger crescent gills.


== Quagsire ==
Quagsire (ヌオー, Nuō) has an appearance and habitat similar to that of a giant salamander. Quagsire live a carefree life in muddy ponds and rivers. It is rather clumsy and in the games has a high defense rating. It acts oblivious to its environment, accidentally bumping its head on the hulls of boats and bottoms of whatever body of water it swims in as it swims, but seeming not to care. Quagsire always bear an absent-looking facial expression. This is likely due to Quagsire's easy-going nature. It hunts by staying still in the water with its mouth open, waiting for small prey to swim into its mouth. It doesn't move, and therefore, doesn't get hungry. It is not uncommon that a fishermen's hook will get caught in the gaping mouth of a feeding Quagsire. Trying to eat what it has caught, the Quagsire would try to swallow, and end up pulling the fishermen off his boat and into the water. Male Quagsire have larger fins on their backs. They wait at the bottom of lakes waiting for prey to wander into its mouth. It also loves eating Cheri Berries.
GamesRadar noted Quagsire as a disappointing Pokémon. They explained that Wooper was cute, and featured potential due to its combination of Water and Ground types. However, when it grows into Quagsire, its appearance becomes something resembling the “Godzilla's illegitimate child with the Pillsbury Dough Boy”. They add that it is inferior to Swampert in both gameplay and being intimidating.


== Espeon ==
Espeon (エーフィ, Ēfi) is an evolved, lavender-colored, cat-like form of Eevee that became available with the Japanese release of Pokémon Gold and Silver. The appearance of Espeon is said to resemble the Japanese mythological creature known as Nekomata which also displays the feline body with forked tail tip and solid colored eyes. An Espeon's fur is so sensitive it is used to sense air currents, allowing it to predict the weather, as well as the actions of its opponent in battle. Its forked tail quivers when this occurs. A red jewel rests on its head and glows whenever Espeon uses its psychic abilities. Espeon are described as being very loyal to their trainers once they consider them worthy. They are also said to develop precognitive abilities in order to protect their trainers, Espeon become enabled to see into the future to identify potential threats. Eevee evolves into Espeon by having a high happiness level and leveling up during the day.
IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that Espeon was "beautiful" due to its "pair of haunting obsidian eyes" and while she preferred the original Eevee evolutions Jolteon, Flareon, and Vaporeon, Espeon has brought its "fair share of originality to the Pokemon pool". Author Joanne O'Sullivan listed Espeon as a good video game-based name for a cat.


== Umbreon ==
Umbreon (ブラッキー, Burakkī), known as the Moonlight Pokémon, evolves from Eevee when it has gained a complete trust of its trainer at night. Just like Espeon, Umbreon is also based on Japanese mythology, the moon rabbit. It has the generic feline like body common for all the other evolutions of Eevee, with a pair of crimson cat eyes and yellow bands on its ears and tail. Umbreon's forehead and legs have yellow rings on them, that resemble the symbol of eclipse, they are said to glow at night. Umbreon can spray a poisonous sweat whenever it gets agitated, a reference to the move Toxic, which most competitive Umbreon carry. Despite its frail appearance, Umbreon has incredible defenses, and recovery moves in Moonlight and Wish to back them up. Umbreon tend to be found in dark areas such as thick forests, but are most commonly found under the care of people. Umbreon's English name comes from UMBRA, the darkest part of an eclipse, followed by eon, as of all other Eevee evolutions.
1UP.com's Michael Vreeland called Umbreon a "popular favorite". Pokémon Chick described it as "beautiful" and a "ringed ebony tank". She also called it an "annoyer", a type of Pokémon who lacks "attacking moves". Early fan translations of Gold and Silver translated Umbreon's type to be "evil", which IGN's Pokémon of the Day Guy countered through the description of the Latin word "eon" which is a part of its name to mean "emanations sent forth by God from the depths of His grand solitude to fulfill various functions in the material and spiritual universe".


== Murkrow ==
Murkrow (ヤミカラス, Yamikarasu) is a small black carrion crow with red eyes. The top of its head is styled as a witch's hat and its tail bristles out like a broomstick. Its name is a portmanteau of the English words murk and crow. Murkrow is rather unpopular within the Pokémon world. Its dismal appearance and nocturnal nature have long caused it to be considered an omen of ill fortune to all who see it. If a Murkrow finds itself wounded, it fights back by leading its pursuers to dark mountain trails in an attempt to get them hopelessly lost in the darkness.
Murkrow is also attracted to bright, shiny objects, which it collects to stash in its nest. This, of course, leads to many arguments between Murkrow and Meowth, who both share a common love of stashing things - and taking from each other. It does not hesitate to steal such objects if necessary and has even been known to attempt to snatch rings off women's fingers.
With the addition of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, it is revealed that some Murkrow are servants to its evolved form, Honchkrow, who spends all of its time preening and ordering the Murkrow around. Also with Diamond and Pearl's release, Murkrow, like many other Pokémon, have gender differences. In this case, Males have a taller "hat" - technically, the crest that resembles a three-pointed witch hat - than females would. Murkrow can only be found wild in the Pokémon Diamond Version in Eterna Forest and in Pokémon Black/White in the Abuntant Shrine, while Misdreavus can only be found in Pokémon Pearl at the same location.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called it "useless and forgettable".


== Slowking ==
Slowking (ヤドキング, Yadokingu, Yadoking in original Japanese language versions) is one of the two different species Slowpoke can evolve into, Slowbro being the other. Slowking's appearance is essentially identical to that of Slowpoke, with a few additions: it stands upright, it sports a red-and-white ruff around its neck and it has a bone-like structure on top of its head that is a cross between a helmet and a crown. This is actually a different form of Shellder, similar to the one biting Slowbro's tail. When Slowking is viewed from behind, the eyes of the Shellder can be seen. The Shellder biting Slowking's head injects toxins inside its brain every time Slowking yawns. The poisons interact with Slowking's neural tissue to unlock mental faculties hitherto untapped, making Slowking considerably smarter and more alert than the sluggish Slowpoke or Slowbro. This makes it stand out among the aforementioned species, which recognize it as a leader of sorts.
The anime adds a ritualistic test to select the leader of the Slowpoke and Slowbro. A group of Slowpoke gather in a Shellder-infested lake, at the middle of which lake a King's Rock. The Slowpoke that manages to dodge the Shellder and avoid evolving into Slowbro make it to the King's Rock and places it on its head, whereupon a Shellder clamps on the rock, triggering Slowpoke's evolution into Slowking.
Some Slowking have shown themselves capable of learning human speech, as seen in the movie Pokémon 2000 in which one helps Ash restore order to the world by getting three spheres protected by Articuno, Zapdos, and Moltres. It may also have a sense of humor; during a blizzard, Slowking was quoted as saying "I could use pants".
Slowking is voiced by Nathan Price.


== Misdreavus ==
Misdreavus (ムウマ, Mūma) is a relatively small, corporeal apparition that somewhat resembles the disembodied head of a human female. It lacks a nose, has thick, flowing “hair”, and large, yellow eyes with red irises. It appears to wear a necklace of red pearls. Misdreavus lives deep in dark caves. It projects frightening screeching and wailing noises, as well as creepy, sobbing cries, at enemy Pokémon it encounters in the caves, so as to build up a level of fright strong enough so that the Pokémon will flee. Misdreavus’ pearl necklace apparently serves as its means for feeding by absorbing the fearful feelings of targets for nutrition. In the event that a human, trepid or otherwise, enters a cave area inhabited by a Misdreavus, the Pokémon will attempt to drive him or her out by biting and pulling at the intruding human’s hair, which is used for defense.
Misdreavus can only be found wild in the Pokémon Pearl Version in Eterna Forest, while Murkrow can only be found in Pokémon Diamond at the same location. In addition, those games first introduced the evolved forms of both Pokémon, achievable only through usage of a Dusk Stone. It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. In the anime, Zoey owns a Misdreavus.
GamesRadar called Misdreavus "one of the cutest Ghost-types".


== Unown ==

Unown (アンノーン, Annōn), known as the Symbol Pokémon, Unown are hieroglyph-like, thin, black symbols usually found on walls. There are 28 forms of Unown, one for each letter of the alphabet, a question mark and an exclamation point. They were featured as the main antagonists of Spell of the Unown, the third Pokémon movie. Unown have also appeared in Super Smash Bros. Melee and the Pokémon Adventures manga.Unown have 28 different forms, based on the letters of the Latin alphabet; the two punctuation marks of a question mark and an exclamation point were released in Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen. In the Pokémon universe, it is said that each form has different abilities (though all Unown have Levitate). If multiple Unown come together, their power increases, which is shown in Pokémon 3: The Movie, where a large cluster of Unown come together and are able to bend reality.


== References ==