A soft drink is a beverage that typically contains carbonated water, one or more flavourings and sweeteners such as sugar, HFCS, fruit juices, and/or sugar substitutes such as sucralose, acesulfame-K, aspartame and cyclamate. Soft drinks may also contain caffeine, colorings, preservatives and other ingredients.


== Flavors ==

Almond – common mixed flavor in many drinks, also the primary flavor for brands like Suburban Club colas. Almond-flavored soft drinks are sometimes prepared using orgeat syrup.
Apple – Fassbrause is a non-alcoholic or alcoholic (depends from the brand) German drink made from fruit and spices and malt extract, traditionally stored in a keg. It often has an apple flavor. Apple Beer is a non-alcoholic American variant of fassbrause, produced by The Apple Beer Corporation in Salt Lake City. Aspen Soda was an apple-flavored soda sold across the United States by PepsiCo from 1978 until 1982. In 1984, PepsiCo came out with a replacement apple soda under its new Slice line.
Apricot
Birch Beer
Blackberry – like those made by Izze
Brazil nut
Champagne cola – a class of sodas, with a color lighter than cola and darker than cream soda, and flavors similar to both
Cherry cola – brands include Coca-Cola Cherry, Pepsi Wild Cherry and Cherry RC, among others.
Cherry soda  – brands of cherry-flavored soda include 7 Up, Cherikee Red and Crush, among others.
Cherryade – soft drinks prepared with cherry juice.
Chocolate 
Citron – an example is Cedrata Tassoni, an Italian, citron-flavored soft drink brand
Clementine - made by Izze
Cola – originally contained caffeine from the kola nut and cocaine from coca leaves, and was flavored with vanilla and other ingredients. Most colas now use other flavoring (and caffeinating) ingredients with a similar taste and no longer contain cocaine. It became popular worldwide after pharmacist John Pemberton invented Coca-Cola in 1886.
Cranberry - previously from Sprite and Izze
Cream soda  – often flavored with vanilla, such as Big Red
Cucumber soda  – a type of soda made by various manufacturers including Mr. Q. Cumber. Pepsi offers an ice cucumber flavor in some markets.
Dandelion and burdock A popular favorite within the UK since the middle ages. Popular brands include Ben Shaws owned by Cotts of Canada 
Gentiana – such as Moxie 
Ginger ale  – a carbonated soft drink flavored with ginger in one of two ways. The golden style is closer to the ginger beer original, and is credited to the American doctor Thomas Cantrell. The dry style (also called the pale style) is a paler drink with a much milder ginger-flavor to it, and was created by Canadian John McLaughlin.
Ginger beer – produced in two versions: brewed ginger beer (which includes home-brewed) or a carbonated drink flavored primarily with ginger and sweetened with sugar or artificial sweeteners.
Grape soda – grape-flavored soft drinks and sodas
Grapefruit – brands of grapefruit-flavored soda include Fresca, Pelmosoda and Squirt, among others.
Guarana – carbonated soft drinks with guarana are produced and marketed in Latin American countries.
Guava  – such as Jarritos brand
Irn-Bru – A citrus-based soft drink that is popular in Scotland
Lemon  – liquid derived from the outer skin of lemons may be used to flavor soft drinks, other beverages and foods. Brands of lemon-flavored soda include Coca-Cola with Lemon, Gini and Solo, among others.
Lemonade  – in the United Kingdom, lemonade is carbonated.
Lemon-lime – a common carbonated soft drink flavor, consisting of lemon and lime flavoring
Lemon verbena (Hierba Luisa) – such as Inca Kola
Lime – such as limeade
Lemon – such as lemonade
Litchi 
Malt – such as Malta, which is a brewed, carbonated malt beverage that is not fermented, and hence non-alcoholic
Mandarin orange – examples include sodas produced by Maine Root Handcrafted Beverages, Slice and Goya
Mango –  such as Jarritos brand
Melon  – Mello Yello produced a melon soda called Mello Yello Melon. It was discontinued.
Mulberry
Nectarine – made by Izze
Orange soft drink – sometimes referred to as orangeade 
Papaya - such as the discontinued product by Izze
Passionfruit - such as Passiona, sold only in Australia. There was also a brand of Fanta produced in Brazil with the flavor, selected by the customers in a contest.
Peach  – such as Big Peach or Nehi Peach
Pear - such as the previous product by Izze
Pineapple – brands of pineapple-flavored soda include Fanta, Sun Crest and The Pop Shoppe, among others.
Pomegranate - such as Hansen's
Raspberry – may be referred to as raspberryade in the United Kingdom. Similar soft drinks are also known as raspberry soda in other parts of the world.
Root beer – originally made using the root of the sassafras plant (or the bark of a sassafras tree) as the primary flavor.
Elder or elderberry – used in soft drinks such as socată
Sarsaparilla  – originally made from the Smilax regelii plant. Nowadays, sodas with this flavor are sometimes made with artificial flavors.
Strawberry – brands of strawberry-flavored soda include Catawissa Bottling Company, Stewart's Fountain Classics and Vess, among others.
Tamarind  – such as Jarritos Tamarindo
Watermelon  – such as Jarritos brand
Soft drink flavors


=== Specialty ===
Bludwine / Budwine – is a brand of cherry-flavored soft drink that was produced in the United States by the Bludwine Company and Bludwine Bottling Company. In 1921, the company changed the name of the soft drink product from Bludwine to Budwine. Production of Budwine stopped in the mid-1990s. As of 2009, the brand was in existence and run by two entrepreneurs in Georgia.
Dandelion and burdock – consumed in the British Isles since the Middle Ages. It was originally a type of light mead, but over the years has evolved into the non-alcoholic soft drink commercially available today. Fentimans produces a variety of this drink.
Bacon soda – a soft drink beverage that has the flavor of bacon. Several U.S. companies produce bacon soda brands, including Jones Soda, Lockhart Smokehouse and Rocket Fizz.
Buffalo wing – produced by Rocket Fizz 
Coffee – produced by Rocket Fizz 
Julebrus – a Norwegian soft drink, usually with a festive label on the bottle. It is brewed by most Norwegian breweries, as a Christmas drink for minors, who aren't eligible (by law) to enjoy the traditional juleøl (English: Christmas Ale), but is also very popular among adults as well.
Open-source cola – any cola soft drink produced according to an open-sourced recipe
Ranch dressing – produced by Rocket Fizz 
Squash – a non-alcoholic concentrated syrup mixed with water or carbonated water to create a soft drink

Specialty soft drink flavors


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==

 Media related to Soft drinks at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of Soft drink at Wiktionary