Right hemisphere brain damage, often abbreviated as RHD, is damage to the right hemisphere of the brain. It is associated with a number of cognitive and behavioral difficulties in humans. Research has for long focused on the effect and the role of RHD on emotional problems and in particular on speech prosody. The damage may be due to physical incidents, stroke, or aging. Different etiologies of right hemisphere damage create different deficits.
For over a century, the left brain hemisphere had been the key focus of clinical research on language disorders. It is now well established that language and cognition can be seriously impaired by unilateral RHD. Specific cognitive tests can now help diagnose the existence of RHD versus left hemisphere damage. However, not all individuals with RHD may have problems in language or communication and some may have no discernible symptoms. Patients with RHD perform poorly in three specific tasks, compared to those with left hemisphere damage: characterizing emotions in faces; matching emotional expressions; and grouping pictorially presented and written emotional scenes.Typically, right hemisphere damage is not involved in language-related deficits. A person that has experienced a right hemisphere stroke may still have intact language abilities. 
Deficit in the use and understanding of innuendo, connotation and thematic content has been observed in patients following RHD. Paralinguistic comprehension problems involving sarcasm, irony, etc. have also been detected in these patients. Individuals with RHD also find it difficult to extract the theme of a story, or arrange sentences based on the theme of a story. This type of difficulty also applies to visual languages such as deaf sign languages. However, patients with RHD may be oblivious to some of their impairments (anosognosia) and may at times also report euphoria. Adults with RHD may exhibit behavior that can be characterized by insensitivity to others and preoccupation with self; unawareness of the social context of conversations; and verbose, rambling and tangential speech.
The visual and cognitive effects of RHD produced by a stroke have been well documented in the artistic style of famous painters for several decades now. In many cases, RHD produces dramatic shifts in artistic style. In the case of one artist, paintings after RHD began to have words inserted into pictures.
Etiology of Right Hemisphere Disorders Stroke is the most common source of damage for a RHD. The stroke for this disorder occurs in the right hemisphere of the brain. Other etiologies that cause RHD include: trauma (Traumatic Brain Injury), disease, seizures disorders, and infections. Depending on the etiology that causes the right hemisphere damage, different deficits can be accounted for. "The level of deficit or disorder an individual with right hemisphere damage displays depends on the location and extent of the damage. A small focal right hemisphere stroke can produce a very specific deficit and leave most other cognitive and perceptual processes intact, whereas a very large stroke in the right hemisphere more than likely results in multiple profound deficits." Adults with RHD may exhibit behavior that can be characterized by insensitivity to others and preoccupation with self; unawareness of the social context of conversations; and verbose, rambling and tangential speech.


== See also ==
Agnosia
Aphasia


== References ==