Kristen Anderson-Lopez is an American songwriter. Anderson-Lopez, along with her husband Robert Lopez and Henry Jackman, wrote and produced music for the 2011 Disney film Winnie the Pooh, for which they were nominated for an Annie Award for Best Music in a Feature Production. She also provided the voice of Kanga in the film. Additionally, she wrote songs for a Walt Disney World production of Finding Nemo – The Musical. She and her husband also wrote the songs for Disney's Frozen including "Let It Go", for which they won an Oscar at the 86th Academy Awards on March 2, 2014.
Anderson-Lopez is also the co-creator of the Drama Desk Award winning, Broadway-bound musical In Transit, developed at the O’Neill Musical Theatre Conference, opened Off Broadway in 2010, and after receiving Drama Desk, Drama League, and Lucille Lortel recognition, is slated for a Broadway production in 2013.
Her work for young audiences includes numerous short and full-length musical adaptations for Theatreworks USA (Diary of a Worm, Fancy Nancy, Condensed Classics). She has written several songs for television and was a staff writer for the award-winning children’s show, Wonder Pets, on Nick Jr.
Anderson-Lopez is currently working on the new romantic stage musical Up Here with her husband and Alex Timbers. The couple are also working on another musical, Disney's Bob the Musical, with Allan Loeb writing the story.


== Personal lifeEdit ==
Anderson-Lopez was raised in three different places: Croton-on-Hudson, New York (a suburb of New York City), to 1986; the Myers Park neighborhood of Charlotte, North Carolina, from 1986 to 1990; and Waxhaw, North Carolina (a suburb of Charlotte), from 1990 onward (which served as her home base during her college years). Her parents, Erin and John, still live in Waxhaw. According to her father, Anderson-Lopez first fell in love with the theater at the age of four, when he took her to see a U.S. Bicentennial musical tribute staged in their then-hometown of Croton-on-Hudson. After her family moved to North Carolina, she attended and graduated from Charlotte Country Day School. She went on to Williams College in western Massachusetts, where she double-majored in drama and psychology and graduated in 1994. After a theater internship in Florida, Anderson-Lopez spent several years working temporary jobs while pursuing her dream of becoming a Broadway theatre performer in New York City. In 1999, she entered the BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theatre Workshop and found her true calling as a lyricist, and also met her future husband Robert Lopez.
In October 2003, Anderson married Lopez, who would go on to become an EGOT-winning songwriter, composer and lyricist, including three Tony Awards for Avenue Q and The Book of Mormon. They have two daughters; Katie and Annie, who both had voice parts in Frozen.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Kristen Anderson-Lopez at the Internet Movie Database