Jaime is a common Spanish and Portuguese masculine given name for Jacob, James, Jamie, or Jacques. In Occitania Jacobus became Jacome and later Jacme. In east Spain Jacme became Jaime; in Aragon it became Chaime, in Catalonia it became Jaume. In western Spain Jacobus became Iago, in Portugal it became Tiago. The name Saint James developed in Spanish to Santiago, in Portuguese to São Tiago. The names Diego (Spanish) and Diogo (Portuguese) are also Iberian versions of Jaime.
In the United States, Jaime is used as an independent masculine given name, along with given name Jimmy.
For females, it remains less popular, not appearing on the top 1000 U.S. female names for the past 5 years. It is an alternative spelling of Jamie.
Among Jews in Spanish-speaking countries, "Jaime" is often used as a naturalized version of the unrelated Hebrew name Haim.


== People and characters ==
Jaime Botín, Spanish billionaire heir and banker.
Jaime Camara, Brazilian racing driver
Jaime Camil, actor
Jaime Escalante, Bolivian-American educator and subject of the film Stand and Deliver
Jaime Hernandez, American cartoonist and co-creator of the comic book series Love and Rockets (comics)
Jaime Eyzaguirre, Chilean lawyer and historian
Jaime Guzmán, Chilean lawyer and politician
Jaime Hipp, American water polo goalkeeper
Jaime Huélamo, Spanish road cyclist
Jaime Jiménez Merlo, Spanish football (soccer) player commonly known as Jaime
Jaime King, American actress and model
Jaime King, English Olympic swimmer
Jaime Lachica Sin, Filipino Catholic cardinal who took part in the People Power Revolution
Jaime Lannister, known as "Kingslayer", a fictional character in the fantasy epic novel series A Song of Ice and Fire and its derived works such as TV series Game of Thrones
Jaime Luis Gómez, better known as Taboo, a member of The Black Eyed Peas
Jaime de Marichalar, former Spanish royalty
Jaime Maussan, Mexican journalist
Jaime Melo, Brazilian racing driver
Jaime Moreno, Bolivian football (soccer) player
Jaime Murray, British actress
Jaime Nunó, Spanish composer
Jaime Pressly, American actress
Jaime Patricio Ramírez, Chilean football (soccer) player
Jaime Preciado, bassist of the rock band Pierce the Veil
Jaime Reyes, a DC Comics superhero known as Blue Beetle
Jaime Vera, Chilean football (soccer) player
Jaime Winstone, English actress and daughter of Ray Winstone
Jaime Yzaga, Peruvian tennis player
Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala, wealthy and influential Filipino who is chairman and CEO of Ayala Corporation


== See also ==
Jaime (1974 film), a Portuguese film directed by António Reis
Jaime (1999 film), a 1999 Portuguese film
James
Jamie


== References ==