An indefinite pronoun is a pronoun that refers to non-specific beings, objects, or places.
Indefinite pronouns can represent either count nouns or noncount nouns and include a number of sub-categories: universal (such as everyone, everything), assertive existential (such as somebody, something), elective existential (such as anyone, anything), and negative (such as nobody, nothing).
They are associated with indefinite determiners (sometimes called indefinite adjectives) of a similar (or identical) form (such as every, any, all, some). A pronoun can be thought of as replacing a noun phrase, while a determiner introduces a noun phrase and precedes any adjectives that modify the noun. Thus all is an indefinite determiner in "all good boys deserve favour" but a pronoun in "all are happy".


== List of English indefinite pronouns ==
Note that many of these words can function as other parts of speech too, depending on context. For example, in many disagree with his views the word "many" functions as an indefinite pronoun, while in many people disagree with his views it functions as a quantifier (a type of determiner) that qualifies the noun "people". Example sentences in which the word functions as an indefinite pronoun are given.
Most indefinite pronouns are either singular or plural. However, some of them can be singular in one context and plural in another. The most common indefinite pronouns are listed below, with examples, as singular, plural or singular/plural.
Notice that a singular pronoun takes a singular verb AND that any personal pronoun should also agree (in number and gender). Look at these examples:
Each of the players has a doctor.
I met two girls. One has given me her phone number.
Similarly, plural pronouns need plural agreement:
Many have expressed their views.


=== Table of indefinite pronouns ===
 *The elective existential pronouns are often used with negatives (I can't see anyone), and in questions (Is anyone coming?).


=== List of quantifier pronouns ===
English has the following quantifier pronouns:
Uncountable (thus, with a singular verb form)
enough – Enough is enough.
little – Little is known about this period of history.
less – Less is known about this period of history.
much – Much was discussed at the meeting.
more – More is better. (Also countable plural; see there.)
most – Most was rotten. (Usually specified, such as in most of the food.) (Also countable plural; see there.)
plenty – Thanks, that's plenty.
Countable, singular
one – One has got through. (Often modified or specified, such as in a single one, one of them etc.)
Countable, plural
several – Several were chosen.
few – Few were chosen.
fewer – Fewer are going to church these days.
many – Many were chosen.
more – More were ignored. (Often specified, such as in more of us.) (Also uncountable, see there.)
most – Most would agree. (Also uncountable, see there.)
Some people say that "none" should always take a singular verb, even when talking about countable nouns (e.g. five friends). They argue that "none" means "no one", and "one" is obviously singular. They say that "I invited five friends but none has come" is correct and "I invited five friends but none have come" is incorrect. Actual usage evidence does not support this view. "None" has been used for hundreds of years with both a singular and a plural verb, according to the context and the emphasis required.


=== Possessive forms ===
Some of the English indefinite pronouns above have possessive forms. These are made as for nouns, by adding 's, or just an apostrophe following a plural -s (see English possessive).
The most commonly encountered possessive forms of the above pronouns are:
one's, as in "One should mind one's own business".
those derived from the singular indefinite pronouns ending in -one or -body: nobody's, someone's, etc. (Those ending -thing can also form possessives, such as nothing's, but these are less common.)
whoever's, as in "We used whoever's phone that is."
those derived from other and its variants: the other's, another's, and the plural others': "We should not take others' possessions."
either's, neither's
Note that most of these forms are identical to a form representing the pronoun plus -'s as a contraction of is or has. Hence someone's may also mean someone is or someone has, as well as serving as a possessive.


== Compound indefinite pronouns ==
Two indefinite pronouns can sometimes be used in combination together.
Examples: We should respect each other. People should love one another.
And they can also be made possessive by adding an apostrophe and s.
Examples: We should respect each other's beliefs. We were checking each other's work.


== See also ==
One (pronoun)
Generic you
English personal pronouns
English grammar: Pronouns
Numeral (linguistics)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Quirk, Randolph; Greenbaum, Sidney; Leech, Geoffrey; Svartvik, Jan (1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Harlow: Longman. pp. 376–392. ISBN 9780582517349. 
Haspelmath, Martin (1997). Indefinite pronouns. Oxford: Clarendon. 


== External links ==
Using Indefinite Pronouns