Robert Graham Cooks is the Henry Bohn Hass Distinguished Professor of Chemistry at Purdue University. He is an ISI Highly Cited Chemist, with over 950 publications and an H-index of 81.


== Early life and education ==
He received his BS from University of Natal, South Africa in 1961; his Ph.D. from University of Natal, South Africa in 1965; and his Ph.D. from Cambridge University, Great Britain in 1967.


== Research interests ==
Research in Cooks' laboratory (the Aston Laboratory) has contributed to a diverse assortment of areas within mass spectrometry, ranging from fundamental research to instrument and method development to applications. Cooks' research interests over the course of his career have included the following (citations are representative): the study of gas-phase ion reactions (e.g., unimolecular reactions of activated radical ions, metastable decay, ion/molecule reactions, and charge exchange reactions ); early developments in tandem mass spectrometry (e.g., complex mixture analysis and instrumentation); Mass-Analyzed Ion Kinetic Energy Spectroscopy (MIKES); kinetic isotope effects; the Kinetic Method for thermochemical determinations; Angle-Resolved Mass Spectrometry; Energy-Resolved Mass Spectrometry (ERMS); chiral analysis; ion activation/dissociation processes (collision-induced dissociation (CID), surface-induced dissociation (SID), and photodissociation (PD) ); desorption/ionization processes (e.g., secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), laser desorption ionization (LD), and desorption electrospray ionization (DESI) ); preparative mass spectrometry (‘ion soft-landing’ and related phenomena); ionization techniques (Matrix-Enhanced Laser Desorption, DESI, Atmospheric Pressure Thermal Desorption/Ionization (APTDI), Low Temperature Plasma (LTP), Paper Spray, and Leaf Spray ); the development of quadrupole ion traps (QITs) and related technologies (e.g., ion injection into QITs, broadband isolation/excitation, resonance ejection, high mass resolution, ion cloud tomography, the Cylindrical Ion Trap (CIT), and the Rectilinear Ion Trap (RIT) ); trapped ion motion phenomena and simulations; Membrane Introduction Mass Spectrometry (MIMS); the origin of life (homochirality); chemical imaging; the development of portable mass spectrometers or miniature mass spectrometers  and related technologies.


== Awards and Fellowships ==
1984 ACS Analytical Division's Chemical Instrumentation Award
1985 Thomson Medal for International Service to Mass Spectrometry
1990 and 1995 NSF Special Creativity Award
1991 Frank H. Field & Joe Franklin Award, (ACS Award for Mass Spectrometry)
1997 Fisher Award (ACS Award for Analytical Chemistry)
2006 Distinguished Contribution in Mass Spectrometry Award
2008 Robert Boyle Prize for Analytical Science
2012 F.A. Cotton Medal for Excellence in Chemical Research of the American Chemical Society
2013 Dreyfus Prize in the Chemical Sciences
2015 Member, National Academy of Sciences


== See also ==
Orbitrap
Desorption electrospray ionization
MIKES


== References ==


== External links ==
Aston Labs
The 2012 S. Dexter Squibb Lecture – CSI: Chemistry, Spectrometry, Innovation. Graham Cooks at UNC Asheville