The United States Statutes at Large, commonly referred to as the Statutes at Large and abbreviated Stat., is the official record of Acts of Congress and concurrent resolutions passed by the United States Congress. Each act and resolution of Congress is called a slip law, which is classified as either public law (abbreviated Pub.L.) or private law (Pvt.L.), and designated and numbered accordingly. At the end of a Congress session, slip laws (now commonly called session laws) are compiled into Statutes at Large, which are numbered and organised by Congress session. They are part of a three-part model for publication of federal statutes consisting of slip laws, session laws (Statutes at Large), and codification (United States Code).


== Codification ==
Today, large portions of slip laws denominated as public laws are now drafted as amendments to the United States Code. Once enacted into law, an Act will be published in the Statutes at Large and will add to, modify, or delete some part of the United States Code. Provisions of a public law that contains only enacting clauses, effective dates, and similar matters are not generally codified. Private laws also are not generally codified.
Some portions of the United States Code have been enacted as positive law and other portions have not been so enacted. In case of a conflict between the text of the Statutes at Large and the text of a provision of the United States Code that has not been enacted as positive law, the text of the Statutes at Large takes precedence.


== History ==

Publication of the United States Statutes at Large began in 1845 by the private firm of Little, Brown and Company under authority of a joint resolution of Congress. During Little, Brown and Company's time as publisher, Richard Peters (Volumes 1–8), George Minot (Volumes 9–11), and George P. Sanger (Volumes 11–17) served as editors.
In 1874, Congress transferred the authority to publish the Statutes at Large to the Government Printing Office under the direction of the Secretary of State.
Pub.L. 80–278, 61 Stat. 633, was enacted July 30, 1947 and directed the Secretary of State to compile, edit, index, and publish the Statutes at Large. Pub.L. 81–821, 64 Stat. 980, was enacted September 23, 1950 and directed the Administrator of General Services to compile, edit, index, and publish the Statutes at Large. Since 1985 the Statutes at Large have been prepared and published by the Office of the Federal Register (OFR) of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).
Until 1948, all treaties and international agreements approved by the United States Senate were also published in the set, but these now appear in a publication titled United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, abbreviated U.S.T. In addition, the Statutes at Large includes the text of the Declaration of Independence, Articles of Confederation, the Constitution, amendments to the Constitution, treaties with Indians and foreign nations, and presidential proclamations.
Sometimes very large or long Acts of Congress are published as their own volume of the Statutes at Large. For example, the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 was published as volume 68A of the Statutues at Large (68A Stat. 3).


== See also ==
Revised Statutes of the United States
Enrolled Bill
Federal Register
United States Reports
California Statutes
Laws of Florida
Laws of Illinois
Laws of New York
Laws of Pennsylvania


== Notes ==


== Further reading ==
How Our Laws Are Made, by the Parliamentarian of the House of Representatives (PDF).


== External links ==
Volumes 1 to 18 (1789–1875) of the Statutes at Large made available by the Library of Congress
Volumes 1 to 64 (1789–1951) of the Statutes at Large made available by the Congressional Data Coalition via LEGISWORKS.org
Volumes 65 to 125 (1951–2011) of the Statutes at Large made available by the GPO and the Library of Congress via FDsys
Sortable by Bills Enacted into Laws, Concurrent Resolutions, Popular Names, Presidential Proclamations, or Public Laws.

Volumes 1–124 of the Statutes at Large made available by the Constitution Society
Public and private laws from 104th Congress (1995) to present from the Government Printing Office, in slip law format with Statutes at Large page references
Early United States Statutes includes Volumes 1 to 44 (1789–1927) of the Statutes at Large in DjVu and PDF format, along with rudimentary OCR of the text.
United States Statutes and the United States Code: Historical Outlines, Notes, Lists, Tables, and Sources from the Law Librarians' Society of Washington, DC
Second Edition of the Revised Statutes of the United States (1878)