Porcupines are rodents with a coat of sharp spines, or quills, that protect against predators. The term covers two families of animals, the Old World porcupines and New World porcupines. Both families belong to the Hystricognathi branch of the vast order Rodentia and display similar coats of quills, but they still are quite different and are not closely related.
The Old World porcupines live in southern Europe, Asia (western as well as southern), and most of Africa. They are large, terrestrial, and strictly nocturnal. In taxonomic terms, they form the family Hystricidae.
The New World porcupines are indigenous to North America and northern South America. They live in wooded areas and can climb trees, where some species spend their entire lives. They are less strictly nocturnal than their Old World relatives, and generally smaller. In taxonomic terms, they form the family Erethizontidae.
Porcupines are the third-largest of the rodents, behind the capybara and the beaver. Most porcupines are about 25–36 in (64–91 cm) long, with an 8–10 in (20–25 cm) long tail. Weighing 12–35 lb (5.4–15.9 kg), they are rounded, large, and slow. Porcupines occur in various shades of brown, gray, and white. Porcupines' spiny protection resembles that of the unrelated erinaceomorph hedgehogs and Australian spiny anteaters or monotreme echidnas.


== EtymologyEdit ==
The name "porcupine" comes from Latin porcus pig + spina spine, quill, via Old Italian—Middle French—Middle English. A regional American name for the animal is quill pig. Similarly, the German name, Stachelschwein, means "thorn-swine".


== EvolutionEdit ==
Fossils belonging to the Hystrix genus date back to the late Miocene of Africa.


== SpeciesEdit ==


=== TaxonomyEdit ===
A porcupine is any of 29 species of rodents belonging to the families Erethizontidae (genera: Coendou, Sphiggurus, Erethizon, Echinoprocta, and Chaetomys) or Hystricidae (genera: Atherurus, Hystrix, and Trichys). Porcupines vary in size considerably: Rothschild's porcupine of South America weighs less than a kilogram (2.2 lb); the crested porcupine found in Italy, Sicily, North Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa can grow to well over 27 kg (60 lb). The two families of porcupines are quite different, and although both belong to the Hystricognathi branch of the vast order Rodentia, they are not closely related.


=== Old World compared to New World speciesEdit ===
The names "Old World" and "New World" refer to the colonization of the Americas by Europeans. The 11 Old World porcupines tend to be fairly big, and have spikes grouped in clusters.
The two subfamilies of New World porcupines are mostly smaller (although the North American porcupine reaches about 85 cm or 33 in in length and 18 kg or 40 lb), have their quills attached singly rather than grouped in clusters, and are excellent climbers, spending much of their time in trees. The New World porcupines evolved their spines independently (through convergent evolution) and are more closely related to several other families of rodents than they are to the Old World porcupines.


=== LongevityEdit ===
Porcupines have a relatively high longevity and had held the record for being the longest-living rodent, with one individual living to 27 years,  until the record was recently broken by a naked mole-rat living to 28 years.


=== DietEdit ===
The North American porcupine is a herbivore; it eats leaves, herbs, twigs, and green plants such as clover. In the winter, it may eat bark. It often climbs trees to find food.
The African porcupine is not a climber and forages on the ground. It is mostly nocturnal, but will sometimes forage for food in the day. Porcupines have become a pest in Kenya and are eaten as a delicacy.


=== QuillsEdit ===

Porcupines' quills, or spines, take on various forms, depending on the species, but all are modified hairs coated with thick plates of keratin, and embedded in the skin musculature. Old World porcupines (Hystricidae) have quills embedded in clusters, whereas in New World porcupines (Erethizontidae), single quills are interspersed with bristles, underfur, and hair.
Quills are released by contact or may drop out when the porcupine shakes its body. New quills grow to replace lost ones. It was long believed that porcupines had the ability to project their quills to a considerable distance at an enemy, but this has since been proven to be untrue.


== UsesEdit ==

Porcupines are only occasionally eaten in Western culture, but are very popular in Southeast Asia, particularly Vietnam, where the prominent use of them as a food source has contributed to significant declines in their populations.
More commonly, their quills and guardhairs are used for traditional decorative clothing. For example, their guardhairs are used in the creation of the Native American "porky roach" headdress. The main quills may be dyed, and then applied in combination with thread to embellish leather accessories such as knife sheaths and leather bags. Lakota women would harvest the quills for quillwork by throwing a blanket over a porcupine and retrieving the quills it left stuck in the blanket.
Porcupine quills have recently inspired a new type of hypodermic needle. Due to backward-facing barbs on the quills, when used as needles, they are particularly good at two things – penetrating the skin and remaining in place. The presence of barbs acting like anchors makes it more painful to remove a quill that has struck into the skin of predator.


== HabitatEdit ==

Porcupines occupy a short range of habitats in tropical and temperate parts of Asia, Southern Europe, Africa, and North and South America. They live in forests and deserts, and on rocky outcrops and hillsides. Some New World porcupines live in trees, but Old World porcupines stay on the rocks. Porcupines can be found on rocky areas up to 3,700 m (12,100 ft) high. They are generally nocturnal but are occasionally active during daylight.


== ClassificationEdit ==

Porcupines are distributed into two evolutionary independent groups of the order Rodentia, suborder Hystricomorpha.
Infraorder Hystricognathi
Family Hystricidae: Old World porcupines
African brush-tailed porcupine, Atherurus africanus
Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine, Atherurus macrourus
Crested porcupine, Hystrix cristata
Cape porcupine, Hystrix africaeaustralis
Indian porcupine, Hystrix indicus
Malayan porcupine, Hystrix brachyura
Himalayan porcupine, Hystrix (brachyura) hodgsoni

Sunda porcupine, Hystrix javanica
Sumatran porcupine, Hystrix (Thecurus) sumatrae
Bornean porcupine, Hystrix (Thecurus) crassispinis
Philippine porcupine, Hystrix (Thecurus) pumilis
Long-tailed porcupine, Trichys fasciculata

Parvorder Phiomorpha sensu stricto
Family Thryonomyidae: cane rats
Family Petromuridae: Dassie rats
Family Bathyergidae: African mole-rats

Parvorder Caviomorpha
Superfamily Erethizontoidea
Family Erethizontidae: New World porcupines
Brazilian porcupine, Coendou prehensilis
Bicolored-spined porcupine, Coendou bicolor
Andean porcupine, Coendou quichua
Black dwarf (Koopman's) porcupine, Coendou nycthemera (koopmani)
Rothschild's porcupine, Coendou rothschildi
Santa Marta porcupine, Coendou sanctemartae
Mexican hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus mexicanus
Paraguaian hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus spinosus
Bahia porcupine, Sphiggurus insidiosus
Brown hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus vestitus
Orange-spined hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus villosus
Streaked dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus ichillus
Black-tailed hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus melanurus
Roosmalen's dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus roosmalenorum
Frosted hairy dwarf porcupine, Sphiggurus pruinosus
North American porcupine, Erethizon dorsatum
Stump-tailed porcupine, Echinoprocta rufescens
Bristle-spined porcupine, Chaetomys subspinosus (sometimes considered an echimyid)

Superfamily Cavioidea
Family Hydrochaeridae: capybara
Family Caviidae: Guinea-pigs
Family Dasyproctidae: agoutis and acouchis

Superfamily Octodontoidea
Family Abrocomidae: chinchilla-rats
Family Octodontidae: degus
Family Ctenomyidae: tuco-tucos
Family Echimyidae: spiny rats
Family Myocastoridae: nutrias
Family Capromyidae: hutias

Superfamily Chinchilloidea
Family Chinchillidae: chinchillas and allies
Family Dinomyidae: pacaranas


== See alsoEdit ==
New World porcupines
Old World porcupines


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Porcupines: Wildlife summary from the African Wildlife Foundation
"Resource Cards: What About Porcupines?" Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Porcupine control in the western states hosted by the UNT Government Documents Department
Porcupine Tracks at the Wayback Machine (archived October 15, 2009): How to identify porcupine tracks in the wild