Nagmamahal, Manay Gina (Lovingly Yours, Manay Gina) is an award-winning Filipino tri-media drama anthology produced by Sampaguita Television and aired on GMA Network, in Super Radyo DZBB and Balita Tabloid. The three projects carry the same name; The TV version featured a weekly story that starts in Monday and concludes on Friday. And while the radio version follows the same format, it featured a different true-to-life story. It is interactive: listeners participated in formulating the right conclusion for each episode, every Sunday.
The TV show/radio drama/tabloid column is hosted, anchored and written by Gina de Venecia also known as Manay Gina.
Nagmamahal, Manay Gina is the spin-off of Pira-pirasong Pangarap, another tri-media drama anthology with the same format. The only difference is that Pira-piraso... featured battered and abused women's stories, while Nagmamahal... focuses solely on inspirational true-to-life stories.
The TV version lasted for almost a year, while the radio version lasted till 2009 when the host Gina de Venecia ran for candidacy in 2010 national election.


== Production ==
Upon reformatting, Marichu Maceda, the creative head, and the rest of production team decided that the show focuses more on showcasing true-to-life success stories.
They also agreed to present a more intimate portrait of its host, Manay Gina de Venecia. Instead of mere narration, Manay Gina will read the letters of her viewers, and will inject, from time to time, her personal sentiments about the subject. Sampaguita TV wrote commissioned award-winning production designer Tatus Aldana to style a set.


== Theme Song ==
Instead of a heavy song, the production team also opted for lighter theme music. Its theme song, "Ngumiti Ka Na Muli" (Just Smile Again), was a collaboration of Edith Gallardo (lyricist) and Moi Ortiz (melodist) and sang by Annie Quintos of The Company.


== Awards and Recognition ==
Winner - Best Drama Series (2003 Catholic Mass Media Award)
Winner - Best Radio Drama (2003 Catholic Mass Media Award)
Winner - Best Radio Drama (2004 Catholic Mass Media Award)
Winner - Best Radio Drama (2008 Catholic Mass Media Award)
Winner - Best Radio Drama (2009 Catholic Mass Media Award)


== See also ==
List of programs aired by GMA Network
Super Radyo DZBB
Pira-pirasong Pangarap
Magpakailanman


== References ==