A thermal airship is an airship that generates buoyancy by heating air in a large chamber or envelope. The lower density of interior hot air compared to cool ambient air causes an upward force on the envelope. The most common example is the hot air balloon. An airship that uses steam would also qualify as a thermal airship.
Other types of airships use a gas that is lighter than air at ambient temperature, such as helium, as a lifting gas.
Some airship designs that use a lighter-than-air lifting gas heat a portion of the gas, which is usually maintained in enclosed cells to gain additional lift. Heating the lifting gas causes expansion of the gas in order to further lower the density of the lifting gas, which results in greater lift.


== Advantages and disadvantagesEdit ==
Thermal airships have the advantage of being much less expensive than helium-based airships. They are also routinely deflated after each flight and can be readily packed for storage and/or transport.
Hot air craft produce much less uplift per unit volume than helium- or hydrogen-filled craft (about 30% depending on air conditions). This necessitates lighter construction, with fewer controls and hence more difficulty in manoeuvring. This leads to:
lower airspeeds
difficulty in handling on the ground if the ground wind is above 5 knots
difficulty in steering, particularly at low airspeeds
lack of elevator (pitch) control, causing the airship to pitch up or down in response to changes in the throttle setting (a motion called 'porpoising').
In recent years, the steering of these ships has improved somewhat. The most successful approach has been to use higher pressure in the tail fin structures than in the rest of the envelope, or to use an internal structure (see below).


== HistoryEdit ==

The first public flight of a hot air airship was made by Don Cameron (UK) in a Cameron D-96 at the Icicle Meet in January 1973. The aircraft reportedly took 3 years to develop.


== Envelope structuresEdit ==
Most thermal airships are non-rigid. Some are pressurized. In some cases, the pressurized air is taken from a duct located behind the propeller. In other cases, the pressurized air comes from a separate fan.
In 2006, a new type of envelope employing a tensile membrane structure was developed by Skyacht Aircraft. This design uses an unpressurized envelope and an internal structure that uses ribs made of aluminium to keep the envelope in shape. When not in use, the structure folds up in a manner similar to an umbrella. The structure also permits the mounting of a steerable engine/propeller on the tail of the aircraft. The tail-mounted propeller provides for vectored thrust steering, allowing tight turns.


== OperationEdit ==
Like hot air balloons, thermal airships are first inflated partially with cold (ambient temperature) air. Once the envelopes are sufficiently full, a propane burner is ignited and the inflation is completed using heated air.


== See alsoEdit ==
Airship
Hot air balloon
Lighter than air
Blimp


== ReferencesEdit ==
^ Steam Balloon JBFA Article
^ Youtube video of Skyacht


== External linksEdit ==
Hotair-Airship-Blog
Hot air airship site
The Flying Kettle Steam Balloon Project
The Robert D. Hunt Fuel-Less Flight Gravity Plane Invention
Gefa-Flug Hot Air Airships—commercial aircraft company
Gefa-Flug Airship-Programme
Gefa-Flug manufactured airships
Gefa-Flug airship in action - Youtube video
Cameron Hot Air Airships—commercial aircraft company
Lindstrand Hot Air Airships—commercial aircraft company
Skyacht Personal Blimp—company developing a hot air airship
World Championship 1998—Sixth World Airship Championships held in Gatineau, Quebec on the 3rd of September, 1998.
World Championship 2008—Eighth World Airship Championship held in Tsarskoye Selo, Russia, June 2008.
The tree top raftRadeau des cimes
Aerostatic tools Dany Cleyet-marrel
ART-Airships