A remote administration tool (RAT) is a piece of software that allows a remote "operator" to control a system as if he has physical access to that system. While desktop sharing and remote administration have many legal uses, "RAT" software is usually associated with criminal or malicious activity. Malicious RAT software is typically installed without the victim's knowledge, often as payload of a Trojan horse, and will try to hide its operation from the victim and from security software.
The operator controls the RAT through a network connection. Such tools provide an operator the following capabilities:
Screen/camera capture or image control
File management (download/upload/execute/etc.)
Shell control (from command prompt)
Computer control (power off/on/log off if remote feature is supported)
Registry management (query/add/delete/modify)
Hardware Destroyer (overclocker)
Other software product-specific functions
Its primary function is for one computer operator to gain access to remote PCs. One computer will run the "client" software application, while the other computer(s) operate as the "host(s)".


== RAT trojan horsesEdit ==
Many trojans and backdoors now have remote administration capabilities allowing an individual to control the victim's computer. Many times, a file (often called a client or stub) must be opened on the victim's computer before the hacker can have access to it. These are generally sent through email, P2P file sharing software, and in internet downloads. They are usually disguised as a legitimate program or file. Many clients/stubs will display a fake error message when opened, to make it seem like it didn't open. Some will also disable antivirus and firewall software. RAT trojans can generally do the following:
Block mouses and keyboards
Change the desktop wallpapers
Downloads, uploads, deletes, and rename files
Destroys hardware by overclocking
Drop viruses and worms
Edit Registry
Use your internet connection to perform denial of service attacks (DoS)
Format drives
Steal passwords, credit card numbers
Alter your web browser's homepage
Hide desktop icons, task bar and files
Silently install applications
Log keystrokes, keystroke capture software
Open CD-ROM tray
Overload the RAM/ROM drive
Send message boxes
Play sounds
Control mouse or keyboard
Record sound with a connected microphone
Record video with a connected webcam
Show fake errors
Shutdown, restart, log-off, shut down monitor
Record and control victim's screen remotely
View, kill, and start tasks in task manager
Let the hacker surf the web with the IP-address of the infected computer
A well-designed RAT will allow the operator the ability to do anything that they could do with physical access to the machine. Some RAT trojans are pranks that are most likely being controlled by a friend or enemy on April Fool's Day or a holiday. Prank RATs are generally not harmful, and won't log keystrokes or store information about the system on the computer. They usually do disruptive things like flip the screen upside-down, open the CD-ROM tray, or swap mouse buttons.


== Notable RAT software and trojansEdit ==
Back Orifice
NetBus
iControl
Sub Seven
Beast Trojan
Bifrost
Blackshades
DarkComet
LANfiltrator
Win32.HsIdir
Optix Pro


== See alsoEdit ==
Trojan horse
VNC


== ReferencesEdit ==