Catharanthus is a genus of flowering plants in the dogbane family, Apocynaceae. Like genus Vinca, they are known commonly as periwinkles. There are eight known species. Seven are endemic to Madagascar, though one, C. roseus, is widely naturalized around the world. The eighth species, C. pusillus, is native to India and Sri Lanka. The name Catharanthus comes from the Greek for "pure flower".
These are perennial herbs with oppositely or almost oppositely arranged leaves. Flowers are usually solitary in the leaf axils. Each has a calyx with five long, narrow lobes and a corolla with a tubular throat and five lobes.
Catharanthus roseus, known formerly as Vinca rosea, is a main source of vinca alkaloids, now sometimes called catharanthus alkaloids. The plant produces about 130 of these compounds, including vinblastine and vincristine, two drugs used to treat cancer.
Catharanthus roseus is also cultivated as an ornamental plant in gardens. Several cultivars have been bred to produce flowers in many shades of pink, red, lilac, and white, or in light shades with dark throats.
Species
Catharanthus coriaceus Markgr. - Madagascar
Catharanthus lanceus (Bojer ex A.DC.) Pichon - Madagascar
Catharanthus longifolius (Pichon) Pichon - Madagascar
Catharanthus ovalis Markgr. - Madagascar
Catharanthus pusillus (Murray) G.Don. - India, Sri Lanka, Western Himalayas
Catharanthus roseus (L.) G.Don. – Madagascar periwinkle, old-maid, rosy periwinkle, pink periwinkle - Madagascar; naturalized in Italy, S Asia, Australia, S United States, Central America, and various oceanic islands
Catharanthus scitulus (Pichon) Pichon - Madagascar
Catharanthus trichophyllus (Baker) Pichon - Madagascar


== References ==


== External links ==
Madagascar periwinkle (plant) at Encyclopædia Britannica
Catharanthus at the Encyclopedia of Life
Catharanthus at the National Center for Biotechnology Information
"Catharanthus". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved 7 November 2013. 
Catharanthus at Encyclopædia Britannica
Catharanthus at the Catalogue of Life