The Biggest Loser Pinoy Edition: Doubles was a Philippine reality television currently airing on ABS-CBN. The show was the second season of The Biggest Loser Pinoy Edition which was based on the The Biggest Loser franchise of the United States. It is hosted by Iza Calzado, replacing season one host Sharon Cuneta. Joining Calzado are Matteo Guidicelli and Robi Domingo who replaced the season one gamemaster Derek Ramsay, and are taking the helm of the show's challenge masters. Domingo also served as the show's social media correspondent. Jim Saret returned as one of the professional trainers. However, Chinggay Andrada did not return for this season and was replaced by Toni Saret, the wife of Jim Saret.
The second season was initially set for a March 2013 premiere, but was later moved to January 2014. The show started airing on February 3, 2014 and airs Mondays to Saturdays. Also, a primer showcasing the stories of selected contestants was aired on February 1, 2014.
It ended on April 26, 2014, with Bryan Castillo declared as the winner.


== Development ==
It was announced during the finale of the first season that ABS-CBN will produce a second season, this time in a Doubles format. On November 22, 2011, Sharon Cuneta signed an exclusive contract deal to ABS-CBN's rival network, TV5. Signing the contract deal with TV5 meant that she will be leaving The Biggest Loser Pinoy Edition too. Derek Ramsay coincidentally followed suit to Cuneta, who also signed an exclusive contract deal with TV5.
On January 2012, Iza Calzado left GMA Network, and signed an 3 year-exclusive contract with ABS-CBN. Part of her contract was hosting the second season of the franchise replacing Cuneta. On March 2013, Matteo Guidicelli was announced to replace Derek Ramsay. Robi Domingo also joined the cast as one of the gamemasters.


== Auditions ==

Auditionees must be 18 to 45 years old in order to qualify; Females must weigh at least 200 pounds, while males must be at least 250 pounds. Auditionees must audition by pairs. Pairs must have pre-existing relationships in order to qualify for the auditions.
Auditions took place in the following locations: