The following is a list of supporting characters from the anime and manga series Tenchi Muyo!.


== Choushin ==


=== Lady Tokimi ===


== Masaki Family ==


=== Katsuhito Masaki ===
Katsuhito Masaki (柾木　勝仁, Masaki Katsuhito) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!.
OVA
In the OVA, Katsuhito, also known as Yōshō Masaki Jurai (柾木 遙照 樹雷, Masaki Yōshō Jurai), fled Jurai over 700 years ago to "retire" on Earth. He was once the greatest swordsman on Jurai. Currently Katsuhito is a Shinto priest who is not only training Tenchi to be a Shinto priest but also training him in Jurai swordsmanship. Yōshō had a marriage arranged with half-sister Ayeka, but left. At the time, not all Juraians liked the idea of mixed blood heritages (he is part human, on his mother's side) and he used Ryōko's attack as an excuse to slip away to Earth. In the OVA, he expected that Ayeka was trying to track him down and arranged for Tenchi to fight Ryōko so that his grandson would go in his place to Jurai. Although he had dropped contact with his parents, he was still in touch with Seto (through whom he was able to send Tennyo and Kiriko, among others, into space via the Galaxy Police) although her collusion in his plans is not known. While he appears to be of advanced age, his gray hair and lined face are merely an illusion hiding his true form, which he shows to only a select few (such as his mother).
Yōshō's tree is called Funaho, after his mother. It is a rare first-generation tree spawned directly from Tsunami-no-fune and thus one of the most powerful Jurian tree ships (not including its 0th generation 'mother' Tsunami-no-fune and on par with Azusa's Kirito which is also 1st Generation). It is currently rooted on Earth and so at present cannot take ship form. However, the tree has not lost its power. This was because, during his battle with Ryōko, Yōshō had stolen the three gems originally bonded by Washu and bonded them to the pommel of Tenchi-ken (which was created from the wood of the Tsunami tree). As a result, the gems had supplied power to the tree for over 700 years.
He is in a common law marriage with Airi and has two children from that union called Minaho and Kiyone. He has married one other woman in the past after crashing to Earth (named Kasumi, his cousin and Funaho's niece), and his descendents along that line include Nobuyuki, and Kiriko.
Tenchi Universe
In the Tenchi Universe continuity, Katsuhito is still known as Yōshō and is related to Jurai's royal family and is the greatest swordsman who has ever lived, but is not a close relative to Ayeka or Sasami. While Ayeka and Sasami are from a distant branch family, Yōshō and Tenchi are from the main line. This makes Tenchi the direct heir to the throne of Jurai.
In the movie Tenchi Forever! The Movie (Tenchi in Love 2), it was revealed that, after he defeated Kagato for the first time, he left Jurai along with his lover, Haruna, but tragically, she died upon arriving to Earth. After he arrived, he fell in love with a girl named Itsuki Masaki, who would become Achika Masaki's mother.
Unlike the OVA continuity, where Katsuhito had retained his youthful appearance throughout his seven centuries on earth and simply chooses to appear as an elderly man, Yōshō of the "Tenchi Universe" continuity truly is as elderly as he appears.
Tenchi in Tokyo
In Tenchi in Tokyo, Katsuhito is not part of any line to Jurai's Royal Family. He is just the wise guardian of the Masaki Shrine. He also doesn't display any kind of special powers in the series. Near the finale, when Washu needed to go to Tenchi to warn him about Yugi, Katsuhito went with her. It is there that Katsuhito revealed to Tenchi that the Masaki family are Earth's protectors that secretly battle against any enemy that is a threat to the Earth and the gems that Tenchi received from his late mother are in fact the power that had been granted to them by the gods of the Earth that repels all evil.
Later, after Yugi began to freeze time and after Tenchi went to fight her, Katsuhito explained to Washu that Tenchi won't kill Yugi as he had preferred to be a kindhearted person which is why Washu and the other women from space are allowed to live on Earth in the Masaki Shrine. Katsuhito explained that through this method it enables for Tenchi to be true to himself and be able to fulfill his Planet Guardian duties. This proved to be true when Tenchi chose to spare Yugi.
Pretty Sammy
In Magical Project S (Pretty Samy TV), Katsuhito and Yōshō appear as Genjūrō Hagakure (葉隠 源十郎, Hagakure Genjūrō) and Binpachi Hagakure (葉隠 敏八, Hagakure Binpachi), respectively, in episode 10. Genjūrō Hagakure is the leader of the ninja village theme park and is working to prevent Nobuyuki Onijigoku from turning it to a wild west theme park but had become bedridden. Binpachi is Genjūrō's foolish grandson who had chosen to go over Onijigoku's side as he felt that cowboys were cooler than ninja. At the end, Binpachi chose to go back to his family's side after his grandfather protected him from getting shot by Gunman Girl, and Binpachi responded by distracting Gunman Girl with his Ninja skills until Pretty Sammy destroyed her. Genjūrō then was able to convince a depressed Onijigoku that they could convert the theme park into a mixture of the wild west and ninjas. But to help teach Onijigoku a lesson for what he had tried to do, Genjūrō had him and his assistant bound to the entrance of the wild west park as punishment.


=== Nobuyuki Masaki ===
Nobuyuki Masaki (柾木　信幸, Masaki Nobuyuki) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!.
Nobuyuki Masaki is Tenchi's father, and works in the city as an architect. Although he has shown that he is less responsible than his son, Nobuyuki does care deeply for Tenchi, and after losing his wife, Nobuyuki has worked hard to raise him. He is also a Peeping Tom and tries to encourage Tenchi to be more active and not as shy towards women.
Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki
In Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki, Nobuyuki is only a minor character, a distant descendant of Yosho (Katsuhito). Originally, he and Tenchi lived in the city where he would work and Tenchi would go to school. But after Ryoko was awakened, Nobuyuki saw Tenchi with her and was surprised that Tenchi had a girl in his room. Nobuyuki attempted to record their private session, but then Ayeka arrived and Nobuyuki was miniaturized along with the house by Ryoko while escaping from Ayeka.
Afterwards, the house was permanently relocated next to the Masaki family shrine and Nobuyuki eventually moved back into the city living in an apartment with an old friend of the family, Rea Masaki. He and Rea became engaged and at the end of the series they were married.
Before the ceremony, Tenchi at first was angry when he found out that the story he was told about how his late mother Kiyone died was fictitious. Eventually Tenchi and Nobuyuki talked and Tenchi apologized for his earlier behavior and chose to accept his father's new wife Rea, as she had been more of a mother figure to him than his real mother and having her around won't be any different. Nobuyuki admitted that it was because of that fictitious story that they hesitated to tell him about the truth behind Kiyone's death or that Kiyone was also a prankster.
Due to his Juraian heritage and training (enhancement) at the Galaxy Academy, Nobuyuki has lived longer than any normal human, and is currently around two hundred years of age.
Tenchi Universe
In Tenchi Universe, Nobuyuki is in fact Katsuhito's son-in-law, and he prefers to address Katsuhito as father since Nobuyuki married into the Masaki family and took up the Masaki surname. Nobuyuki's personality is very similar to that of the OVA series. One difference is that since Nobuyuki and Tenchi have always lived with Katsuhito, Nobuyuki constantly complains about the long commute and how he can't catch a break from work with so many development projects. Nobuyuki has also a few times hit on his female secretary and even brought in a Bouquet of flowers for her. Although Nobuyuki had to travel with everyone to Planet Jurai and found out the truth about the mysteries revolving around his son and father-in-law, by the time he had gotten back to Earth, Nobuyuki had not changed at all.
Tenchi Muyo! in Love
In the movie Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love we see another side of Nobuyuki. Back when he and Tenchi's mother Achika (the name of Tenchi's mother in Tenchi Universe and Tenchi in Tokyo) were in high school, Nobuyuki was very shy and was not the sleazy pervert back then. Nobuyuki used to draw houses as he had a talent for drawing before he got into his job as an architect and also loved to record him and Achika on a video camera, although both of them were too shy to express their feelings towards one another. Although Nobuyuki was trapped with Achika along with Kain in a second dimension, it was watching Nobuyuki getting knocked unconscious by Kain that awakened Achika's dormant Jurai powers. Both were rescued by Tenchi, Ryoko, and Ayeka and then both of their memories were erased so it wouldn't affect the future. Ironically, the dream house that Nobuyuki had drawn for him and Achika is in fact the house that he, Tenchi, and their extended family now live in.
Tenchi Forever!
In the movie Tenchi Forever! The Movie, Nobuyuki only makes a brief cameo at the beginning of the film. After six months since Tenchi had disappeared, Nobuyuki told Katsuhito that after he filed a missing-person report to the police for Tenchi, they had found nothing. Nobuyuki became worried about Tenchi, but Katsuhito reminds Nobuyuki that Tenchi is not a weak man.
Tenchi in Tokyo
Nobuyuki's personality is slightly different in Tenchi in Tokyo. He is not perverted, although he is shown as a smoker in this series. He also deeply cares about Tenchi's best interests and does what he can to help him, including not giving the girls a train ticket to Tokyo. He is frequently tortured for comic relief purposes, along with Ryo-Oh-Ki.
Nobuyuki was also married to Achika in this version.
Magical Project S
Nobuyuki makes a cameo appearance as the character Nobuyuki Onijigoku (鬼地獄 信幸, Onijigoku Nobuyuki) (aka Oni Jigoku in the Pioneer subtitles) in Episode 10 of the Pretty Sammy television series. Onijigoku is the rival of the Hagakure clan and has attempted to force the head of the Hagakure clan, Genjuro Hagakure out of his ninja theme park so he could convert it into a wild-western style theme park. Despite temporarily having the help of both Genjuro's grandson Binpachi, as well as Pixy Misa, Onijigoku wasn't able to achieve his plan. However Genjuro convinced him that the theme park can be a ninja/wild-west theme park, but still had Onijigoku and his assistant bound to his theme park entrance as punishment for what he had tried to do.


=== Achika Masaki ===
Achika Masaki (柾木　阿知花, Masaki Achika) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! anime series. She is an original creation of first OVA series' co-writer Naoko Hasegawa, making her animated debut in the 1996 feature Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love. She was the wife of Nobuyuki, the daughter of Katsuhito Masaki (Yosho), and the mother of Tenchi. In the Ryo-Ohki OVA series she does not appear. In that series, Tenchi's mother is Kiyone Masaki, who only appears in a flashback.
She was referenced in Episode 9 of Tenchi Universe, "No Need for Memories".
Tenchi Muyo! in Love
In Tenchi Muyo! in Love, Achika Masaki is Nobuyuki's classmate, and though not forward enough to say it the two have a crush on one another. But what she didn't realize is that she was the prime target for the intergalactic criminal, Kain, who seeks revenge on the Juraian Royal Family by traveling back to 1970 to kill her, wanting an end to their bloodline and place in power. Should he succeed, Tenchi would never have been born and cease to exist in the present.
With the aid of Washu, Tenchi and the gang travel back in time to prevent Kain from achieving his goal. In the end, Achika recognized her future son's appearance, and unleashing her great, hidden Juraian power, she engages in battle with Kain herself. Though she's able to save Tenchi and her future husband, the immense amount of energy dispelled shortened Achika's own life. With their fates erased from memory, she and Nobuyuki spend what time they have happy together, until when in 1984 Achika passes away, leaving Tenchi motherless at the age of five. Coincidentally Achika's mother also died when Achika was an adolescent.
Hasegawa novels
Unlike her counterpart in Hiroshi Negishi's continuity, Achika's past is set in the original OVA series, and lacks the presence of time travel or Kain. She showed great potential even as a young woman, able to see spirits and speak to Funaho, her father's Royal Tree. Yosho hoped for her to inherit the sword and mantle of the royal family (as Tenchi later would). But she was in love and yearned to remain a normal girl without the burden the title would bring upon her.
Still, Achika did not wish to disappoint her father, and with this conflict in her heart she took the bonding ritual with Funaho... and failed, being wounded severely. The man she had loved abandoned her while she was on the mend, causing Achika's efforts to have been for nothing and her heart to break. A year later, Achika had recuperated but was far weaker than in her younger days, catching notice and marrying the much older Nobuyuki because of his resemblance to her father (both were Yosho's descendants).
After another year had passed, Achika gave birth to Tenchi, and everything seemed well. However, at five years of age the powers latent in the boy surfaced, and in poor condition and unable to defend herself Achika was fatally hurt by the Lighthawk Wings. On her deathbed, she asks her father to continue training Tenchi, as her place was now with the goddess Tsunami.
Other appearances
Achika appears in a cameo role in episode 10 of Magical Project S (Pretty Samy TV) as Shinobi Hagakure (葉隠 しのび, Hagakure Shinobi), the granddaughter of Genjuro Hagakure. She is a bit clumsy, but is dedicated to help protect her family's theme park and was the only one who could protect it, as her grandfather was bedridden, and her brother, Binpachi, had defected to Nobuyuki Onijigoku's side. That is, until Sasami Kawai and her father Ginji arrived to help them during Sasami's summer vacation.
She also appears in Tenchi in Tokyo in flashback scenes in Episodes 7, 12, and 17 (In episode 7, somehow in the English version, she was referred to as Tenchi's grandmother, but in the Japanese, she is his mother) . In this version, she was still Tenchi's mother and Nobuyuki's wife. Before her death, Achika gave Tenchi his crystal necklace as an heirloom and a memento of her, which would play a crucial role throughout the series.
An abbreviated version of her tale in Tenchi Muyo in Love! is told in Hitoshi Okuda's seventh No Need for Tenchi! graphic novel, unique to its own canon within the series. Most themes are similar to the film, except Achika does not transform and fight Kain by her lonesome. Instead, she releases all her inner strength in one blast, with she and her son killing the villain together. Peculiarly, while she is not shown in her Juraian state during the actual adaptation she is featured as such on the book's cover.


=== Tennyo Masaki ===
Tennyo Masaki (柾木 天女, Masaki Ten'nyo) is Tenchi Masaki's older sister and a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!, making her first appearance in the third OVA series.
Tennyo is an exact double for Kiyone Masaki, Tenchi's and her mother in the OVAs. Despite her youthful looks, Tennyo is 80 years old, and like her grandfather Katsuhito (Yosho), she often uses an older appearance when among others. Because of her similarity to Kiyone Masaki, Tennyo would often swap places with her and take care of Tenchi when he was a baby. She left right after Tenchi's mother had died, only to reappear when it came time to introduce Noike.
Once she had arrived back on Earth, her father Nobuyuki Masaki was supposed to pretend that Tennyo was Kiyone. However, when he overacted his role, Tennyo was forced to knock him out. Tennyo explained that since she is 80 years old, it would have caused an uproar if she had stayed with Tenchi, since some of her old classmates were still around. Katsuhito later explained to Tenchi that it is because that the Masaki family are forbidden to reveal their true identity to the people of the Earth, since Earth's civilization is still in the development stage, which is the main reason why Tennyo had to leave before.
After that, Tennyo left to go on one final trip together with her old classmates in Hawaii, with her grandmother Airi Masaki and came back just before her father Nobuyuki was to be married to Rea Masaki and then she attended the wedding.
Judging from information from Kajishima-sensei's doujins, Tennyo works at the Galaxy Police or for Airi. She also designed the armaments on the original Kamidake (Seina Yamada's ship)


=== Airi Masaki ===
Airi Masaki (柾木 アイリ, Masaki Airi) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!, making her first animated appearance in the third part of the OVA series and its spinoff, Tenchi Muyo! GXP.
A native of the planet Airai, Airi is Yosho's current wife. She first met Yosho when he went to study at the Galaxy Police Academy. Before she fell in love with Yosho, she was to be married to a member of one of the Jurian royal houses in order so one day she might rise to the throne. This was because the Airaians wanted to get hold of Tsunami, as they believed Tsunami to be one of "the three lives", the three goddesses known as the Chousin (For the other two Chousin, see Tokimi and Washu).
She later called off the engagement when she fell in love with Yosho and was pregnant with his child. She then had the fetus surgically removed and put in stasis until some time later. Later, the child was put back into the womb, was born and named Minaho. She later had another child with Yosho which was named Kiyone Masaki. (Tenchi's mother), which makes her Tenchi's grandmother. However, anyone mentioning the fact that she is a grandmother better learn to run fast... she never likes to hear that she is a grandmother. Not even Tenchi dares to call her 'Grandma'. Conversively, he can't even call her Airi, lest he be affectionately smothered due to how he says it (In Japanese, use of another's given name without honorifics is considered very familiar). In the end, as per suggestion, he simply sticks with the formal Ms. Airi (Airi-san).
She is currently head of the Jurai sector office of the Galaxy Police.
Tenchi originally met Airi in the second episode of the third OVA, when she travelled to Earth to introduce Tenchi's arranged bride Noike to Tenchi and the girls. But while waiting for Tennyo Masaki to give the word to transport down, Noike ran off.
Airi also works as the chairwoman for the Galaxy Police Academy, and works closely with the Academy's headmistress Mikami Kuramitsu. Although Airi has a minor part thus far in the OVA's, she has a larger role to play in GXP.
Airi is also a master of the Neo-Academy fighting style, a martial art often employed during discussions and negotiation. The techniques involved consisted of mainly slapping the offending party silly, as well as employing a cold, hard stare. Airi had used this fighting style on Ryoko when she referred to Airi as 'a middle-aged flusie' and 'a crusty-old hag', with great success. She also has a joker attitude and loves to play practical jokes... whenever she can get away with it. She had even co-wrote the explanation of her daughter Kiyone's death (with help from Kiyone), for which it was to be told to Tenchi. Her older daughter Minaho, however, does not have this trait.
She also has a love for cooking, and would be found in one of the G.P. Academy's restaurants practicing her love. Seina Yamada found out about this when, as a joke committed by Amane Kaunaq, he referred to Airi as 'Granny' when her back was turned to Seina. When Seina found out, he was terrified (mostly because Airi was holding a chef's knife at the time). However, she demonstrates some affection for Seina (feeling jealous of Seto for being able to hang around with Seina while she (Airi) is stuck doing paperwork and crying out for Seina to come back to regular GP duty when she gets overwhelmed by the mountains of paperwork) and shows respect for his being able to take Tarant Shank down and out by himself.


=== Rea Masaki ===
Rea Masaki (正木 玲亜, Masaki Reia) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series and is only a character in the OVA continuity.
Rea Masaki is a distant cousin to Nobuyuki Masaki and a family friend. She had been taught cooking by Nobuyuki's wife Kiyone, so even though she does have her favorite recipes, her cooking style is identical to Kiyone's.
On the day of Kiyone's funeral rites, she was checking on Tenchi Masaki when she noticed the boy had disappeared. Everyone present searched around for Tenchi but couldn't find him. It was during this search that Rea thought of something. Taking Nobuyuki with her, they found Tenchi asleep at the entrance to the cave where Ryoko Hakubi was imprisoned. Tenchi was forbidden to go to the cave by his grandfather Katsuhito Masaki, but always went there anyway. Rea remembered this.
Rea would end up cooking and cleaning house for the Masaki, even though she was a high school student at the time. Sometime later, she would move in with Nobuyuki at an apartment near the site of the house that Nobuyuki designed during Kiyone's lifetime (that house would be moved near the family shrine, destroyed when Mihoshi crashed into it, and rebuilt at the same site). When the school which Tenchi attended was destroyed by fire, not to mention the Great Seto Bridge's destruction, she and Katsuhito were called to Tokyo to explain what had happened, at the Japanese Imperial Palace no less. At the last minute, Katsuhito backed out and Rea had to make the report herself. Months later, she revealed this fact to Tenchi when he came over for a visit, but when he asked her why, she said it was a secret.
At the last episode of the third OVA, Rea and Nobuyuki were married. Among the guests present were the Masaki clan, Airi Masaki, Minaho Masaki, and Tokimi. In Tenchi Muyo! GXP, she is shown to be pregnant. Her son, Kenshi Masaki, is the principal character of Tenchi Muyo! War on Geminar and Rea's mysterious connection to the world of Geminar (part of the reason why Kenshi is sent to Geminar) is revealed in that series.


== Jurai ==


=== Azaka and Kamidake ===
Azaka (阿座化, Azaka) and Kamidake (火美猛, Kamidake) are fictional characters in the manga and anime series Tenchi Muyo!
Azaka and Kamidake, Ayeka's guardians, in the form of floating logs. They can generate a barrier that allows them to protect Ayeka and paralyze their target, though their powers pale in comparison to the power held by the Royal Trees of Jurai.
Tenchi Muyo! OVA's In the Tenchi Muyo! OVA's they are minor characters and serve as doorposts to the Masaki home whenever they are not needed. In the third OVA, their lack of mobility had led to them growing moss and seedlings on them.
Tenchi Universe In the Tenchi Universe storyline, the personalities of two legendary Jurai knights with the same names have been downloaded into them. Near the end of the series, the original Azaka and Kamidake are resurrected when Yosho uses his energy to draw the energies from the two guardians Azaka and Kamidake and transfer them into the original knights in order to resurrect them. The two knights then help Tenchi Masaki get to the Jurai throne room to face Kagato while they face the Dark Jurai knights that serve Kagato.
After the battle, Washu is able to reactive the guardians Azaka and Kamidake. Both the knights have a cameo in the movie Tenchi Muyo in Love 2 which is also set in the same continuity.
Tenchi in Tokyo Azaka and Kamidake also appear in Tenchi in Tokyo in log form. The only difference they have in this continuity is that they have hidden blasters behind their log shells which they use to attack their enemies with. Other than that they follow Ayeka's orders no matter what the consequences may be.
Pretty Sammy Azaka and Kamidake's log forms make a brief appearance in the final episode of Magical Project S (Pretty Sammy TV) as the barrier system that protects Romio's NT System. They were destroyed when Pretty Sammy used the energy from Washu's NT system for her Full Power, Pretty Attack.


=== Azusa Jurai ===
Azusa Masaki Jurai (柾木 阿主沙 樹雷, Masaki Azusa Jurai) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki, emperor of the planet Jurai.
Episode appearances
Azusa only appears in OVA episode 13 and briefly in two episodes of Tenchi Muyo! GXP. Azusa is the father of Yosho, Ayeka, and Sasami. He strongly disapproves of Ayeka's interest in Tenchi, and also greatly underestimates Tenchi's abilities. He is the head of House Masaki, though Funaho rules the house while he is on the throne of Jurai.
In Chapter 1 ("Omen") of Volume 7 ("Picture Book") of Hitoshi Okuda's The All-New Tenchi Muyo! manga, Azusa, Funaho and Misaki visit the Masaki family shrine to participate in the New Year festivities. While he scores "father points" with Sasami courtesy of otoshidama (a traditional gift of money in a decorated envelope), he is nearly drowned courtesy of one of Washu's special fortunes ("LESSER BAD LUCK: You will meet with a flood and be unable to escape"). When Ayeka gets too cosy with Tenchi (after she drinks some sake), he challenges Tenchi to a duel but loses thanks to Ryo-Ohki's drawing a GREATER GOOD LUCK fortune ("A song will save the one you love") and getting hit by lightning after Ryo-Ohki sings a song during the fight. in the end, he joins everyone else in praying before the shrine (praying that Ayeka and Sasami would return home).
In Tenchi Muyo! GXP, Azusa, along with his close friend and Seto's husband Utsutsumi Kamiki, was present at Kiriko Masaki's bonding ceremony. He also appears with his wives Funaho and Misaki when it was revealed that Seina Yamada had become part of Jurai's royal line; Azusa was clearly unhappy about it, muttering about Seina's being under Seto's thumb.
True Tenchi novels
Azusa has the only first generation tree ship in the fleet at this moment, Kirito (Yosho's tree Funaho is also first generation, but at the moment it is currently rooted on Earth, while Tsunami-Fume, which belongs to Sasami, is 0th Generation). Being a first generation ship, it is blessed with enormous power, although not invulnerable. When Azusa fought Kagato his ship was matched against the giant Sōja, and to Azusa's chagrin he found that Kagato was a match for him in power.
Kagato calls upon Ryo-Ohki to attack, and her attack slices through Kirito's Lighthawk wings. Ryo-Ohki's power through its gems could counteract that of the Royal Trees, since both took their strength from the Chousin (Washu and Tsunami, respectively). The clash of energy was considerable, causing a rip in space which Tsunami herself was forced to repair.
Defeated, Kirito was then transported away from Sōja and put near Earth by Tsunami. While there, Azusa saves a young woman from bandits and she helps him recoup from his injuries received from Kagato. Her name was Funaho, the Earthling he would later court and take back to Jurai to be his first wife.


=== Funaho Jurai ===
Funaho Masaki Jurai (柾木 船穂 樹雷, Masaki Funaho Jurai) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!, an empress of the planet Jurai. She is canon to the Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki OVAs, also appearing in its television spinoff Tenchi Muyo! GXP.
Funaho is Azusa Masaki Jurai's first wife, and the mother of Yosho. She also serves as Jurai's Minister of Intelligence, and sees right through Yosho's "Katsuhito" disguise. She is a distant descendant of Masaki, the sister of the first ruler of Jurai, but considers herself to be human since she was born on Earth.
Her main reason for coming to Earth, in OVA Episode 13, other than to see Yosho and to check up on Ayeka and Sasami, was to ask Washu if she would assist Jurai by mass producing Ryoko and Ryo-Ohki for their defenses. However, Washu already knew about this reason and refused because, to Washu, not only would she not betray Tenchi's trust by accepting the offer, she also felt there should only be one Ryoko and Ryo-ohki. Washu then assured a worried Funaho that she won't mass produce Ryoko or Ryo-ohki for any of Jurai's enemies, because she has no interest in helping anyone. (Washu does eventually create a "sister" of Ryo-ohki named Fuku.)
Funaho is paired with the second-generation tree Mizuho, a twin of 2nd Empress Misaki's Karin, both ships have the ability to join together as well, the relationship being a parallel to Funaho and Misaki being married to the same husband.
In Volume 6 ("Dream A Little Scheme") of Hitoshi Okuda's manga series No Need for Tenchi, Funaho and Misaki jointly command the Jurain fleet that goes to retrieve the stolen Royal Tree Bizen (see "Yume" below). At the moment of crisis when Tenchi rallies everyone, Funaho looks on with pride. After Tsumani stabilizes the rogue Bizen, Funaho intimates to Washu that no charges will be brought against Yume, claiming that she and Misaki "just came to see [their] daughters.".
In Volume 9 ("The Quest for More Money") of No Need for Tenchi, both Funaho and Misaki work together and use reverse psychology to get Azusa to send money to help the Masaki family with their dwindling finances after Ayeka swallows her pride and asks her father for help. They pretend to agree with his original decision not to help, but the moment they leave (or pretend to), he starts dialing the Masaki number as they enjoy his being "an old softie".
In Volume 10 ("Mother Planet") of No Need for Tenchi, both Funaho and Misaki come to the Masaki household for a visit. In the story "Cordiality", Funaho asks Tenchi to show her around Kurashiki City, and he lends her his mother's kimono to wear. While Tenchi is searching for a sandal strap (hers had broken while being saved by Tenchi from a runaway car), she is attacked by a mysterious assassin, but she easily defeats and captures him. When Tenchi returns, she asks him to look after Ayeka and Sasami, but he replies (to her amusement) that it's they who seem to be looking after him.
Funaho appears in the story "A Carrot A Day" (Volume 1: "Alien Nation" of Hitoshi Okuda's manga series The All-New Tenchi Muyo!), where she appears in Ayeka's flashback to the time shortly after Yosho left Jurai to chase Ryoko and all contact had been lost. Ayeka had been so upset that she had refused to eat, and only Sasami making her a carrot cake had snapped her out of her depression (Ayeka normally doesn't like carrots, but she [like everyone else] regards Sasami's carrot cake as special). Funaho is shown with Misaki worrying about Ayeka and later watching from Ayeka's bedroom doorway as Sasami gets Ayeka to finally eat.
In Chapters 2 ("Suspicion") and 3 ("Sacrifice") of Volume 6 ("Pet Peeves") of The All-New Tenchi Muyo!, Washu consults with Funaho about the little creature Mitsu whom Ayeka has adopted as a pet. Funaho informs Washu, Katsuhito and Tenchi that the Mitsu are the natural enemy of the Juraian Royal Trees and that this particular Mitsu has been genetically mutated by religious extremists from the planet Airai who are hostile to Jurai. The mutation eventually turns Mitsu into a monster and Ayeka (much to her grief, but with Mitsu's own consent) ends Mitsu's life herself rather than let anyone else take on the burden.
In Chapter 1 ("Omen") of Volume 7 ("Picture Book") of The All-New Tenchi Muyo!, Funaho, Azusa and Misaki visit the Masaki family shrine to participate in the New Year festivities. She not only gets Azusa to behave himself, but her dressing in temple maiden robes causes him to really stop and stare. When everyone prays at the shrine, she prays for "good health for [her] family".
In Tenchi Muyo! GXP, she along with Azusa and Misaki were present when it was revealed that Seina was third in line for the throne of Jurai and was clearly not happy about Airi's informal addressing Azusa as "Father".


=== Misaki Jurai ===
Misaki Masaki Jurai (柾木 美砂樹 樹雷, Masaki Misaki Jurai) is a fictional character in the anime Tenchi Muyo!, an empress of the planet Jurai. She is canon to the Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki OVAs, also appearing in its television spinoff Tenchi Muyo! GXP.
Misaki is Azusa's second wife, and the mother of Ayeka and Sasami. She possesses immense physical strength and is the supreme commander of Jurai's royal bodyguards. She is from House Kamiki of the Royal Family, her mother being Seto Jurai and her adopted sister Noike Kamiki Jurai. She also gets along pretty well with Azusa's first wife, Funaho Jurai (in fact, they make a perfect team when manipulating Emperor Azusa on Tenchi and Ayeka's behalf), and refers to her as Oneesama ("older sister").
In episode 19, it was revealed that Misaki is-or perhaps will become- some sort of god-like being that Z refers to as the "counter-actor", and will have powers surpassing that of the Chousin. ("Omatsuri Zenjitsu no Yoru", a recent doujinshi from Masaki Kajishima, confirmed that this is indeed the real Misaki, not just a being assuming her form). When Misaki attacked and nearly strangled Tokimi to death, Tenchi appears in a glowing form to calm her down, and the two of them kiss and disappear from view. Earlier on, Kajishima's Tenchi novel "Jurai" foretold her future long before her third OVA appearance, reading that someday "the galaxy will know the true terror of Misaki" and that "only Tenchi could stop her". There is little or no explanation regarding the purpose of the "counter-actor", how she received her powers, or why she commits the actions she does.
Misaki is known for having her two daughters address her in a certain way, and is very overprotective of them; in episode 13, Ayeka cried out to Misaki, calling her "Okaa-sama!" ("Mommy!" in the dubbed version) in a high-pitched voice. Ryoko thought this was hilarious, but she regrets saying that as Misaki got mad at her and stretches Ryoko's face. Ayeka wasn't sympathetic to Ryoko, since she warned her not to say anything to begin with. The only way Ryoko got out of this was reading a sign that Sasami written, which said, "I'm sorry, pretty young lady". This was also why Ryoko didn't answer the door in episode 14, thinking Misaki was there, when in fact it was Tenchi's sister Tennyo.
Misaki is paired with the second-generation tree Karin, a twin of 1st Empress Funaho's Mizuho. Both ships have the ability to join together as well. The relationship being a parallel to Funaho and Misaki considering each other sisters married to the same husband.
In Volume 6 ("Dream A Little Scheme") of Hitoshi Okuda's manga series No Need for Tenchi, Misaki and Funaho jointly command the Jurain fleet that goes to reteieve the stolen Royal Tree Bizen (see "Yume" below); she eagerly anticipates visiting Earth after Bizen is recovered to see Sasami and the gang (with her arms loaded down with presents). After Tsumani stabilizes the rogue Bizen, Misaki gives both Minagi and Asahi her trademark bear-hug and line "She's so cute!" and stretches Ryoko's mouth again for referring to her as an "old woman".
In Volume 9 ("The Quest for More Money") of No Need for Tenchi, both Funaho and Misaki work together and use reverse psychology to get Azusa to send money to help the Masaki family with their dwindling finances after Ayeka swallows her pride and asks her father for help. They pretend to agree with his original decision not to help, but the moment they leave (or pretend to), he starts dialing the Masaki number as they enjoy his being "an old softie".
In Volume 10 ("Mother Planet"), both Funaho and Misaki come to the Masaki household for a visit, causing both Ryoko and Ayeka to try and beat a hasty retreat before the mothers arrive (they fail, naturally). In the story "Reliability", the capture of a small monkey (whom Sasami names "Saru-chan") leads both Sasami and Misaki to investigate why a band of monkeys have come down from the mountain to steal food. They learn that unseasonable weather has been preventing the monkeys' supply of nuts and acorns from ripening, and Mizuki calls upon the twin Juraian trees Karin and Mizuho to help revitalize the mountain itself. A bumper crop of acorns and chestnuts immediately sprouts, the monkeys' food supply is assured for at least another ten years and Misaki is hailed by the monkeys as a Goddess.
Misaki has an appearance in the story "A Carrot A Day" (Volume 1: "Alien Nation" of Hitoshi Okuda's manga series The All-New Tenchi Muyo!), where she appears in Ayeka's flashback to the time shortly after Yosho left Jurai to chase Ryoko and all contact had been lost. Ayeka had been so upset that she had refused to eat, and only Sasani's making her a carrot cake had snapped her out of her depression (Ayeka normally doesn't like carrots, but she [like everyone else] regards Sasami's carrot cake as special). Misaki is shown with Funaho worrying about Ayeka and later watching from Ayeka's bedroom doorway as Sasami gets Ayeka to finally eat.
In Chapter 1 ("Omen") of Volume 7 ("Picture Book") of Hitoshi Okuda's The All-New Tenchi Muyo manga, Misaki, Funaho and Azusa visit the Masaki family shrine to participate in the New Year festivities.
In Tenchi Muyo! GXP she, Azusa, and Funaho were present when it was revealed that Seina was third in line for the throne of Jurai and was clearly not happy about Airi's addressing Azusa informally as "Father".


=== Seto Kamiki Jurai ===
Seto Kamiki Jurai (神木 瀬戸 樹雷, Kamiki Seto Jurai) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series, as well as a brief part in Hitoshi Okuda's The All-New Tenchi Muyo! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Seto is the mother of Empress Misaki and the adopted mother of Noike Jurai (grandmother of Ayeka and Sasami), and is a very powerful 'behind the scenes' figure in Jurai politics. Among the royal family. A survivor of the pirate raid of the Jurai Royal Science Academy post on planet K-1190 over 5,000 years prior to GXP, Seto was adopted by the Kamiki family, and retains an intense hatred of pirates. She is married to the Kamiki clan's head, Utsutsumi Kamiki.
Her treeship, Mikagami, is known for her special attack, The Triple Z (AKA the "Genocide Dance"), which literally causes all enemies to stop in their tracks; either due to an Electromagnetic Pulse or some other mechanism, though the effect of this is left to the viewer's imagination.
Because of her political craftiness, and occasionally violent temper, she has been referred to as the "Devil Princess of Jurai".
Seto has a cameo appearance in the story "A Carrot A Day" (Volume 1: "Alien Nation" of Hitoshi Okuda's manga series The All-New Tenchi Muyo), where she appears in Ayeka's flashback to the time shortly after Yosho left Jurai to chase Ryoko and all contact had been lost. Ayeka had been so upset that she had refused to eat, and only Sasani's making her a carrot cake had snapped her out of her depression (Ayeka normally doesn't like carrots, but she [like everyone else] regards Sasami's carrot cake as special). Seto is shown with Sasami in the kitchen and later watching from Ayeka's bedroom doorway as Sasami gets Ayeka to finally eat. She is also mentioned in Chapter 1 ("Longings") of Volume 6 ("Pet Peeves") of The All-New Tenchi Muyo! when Azusa goes to great lengths to make sure a note is delivered personally to Ayeka, not wanting Seto to find out about it as she might make fun of him.
Seto had a small but significant part in the third OVA series (she commented that she had once held Tenchi when he was a baby) and it was also revealed that she already knew that Yosho had fled to Earth because he had secretly contacted her after he left Jurai. She had borrowed Tsunami-fune and used it to throw a party in hopes of bring Misao Kuramitsu and Mashisu Makibi together (which included the rare fruit wine Shinju sake, made from the fruit of Jurai's royal trees). Seto also presided over the meeting to punish those involved in the Choubimaru incident and offered to adopt Mashisu Makibi so she could marry into the Kuramitsu family until Misao's mother Mitoto arrived and announced that Mashisu had the Kuramitsu family council's support.
However Seto had a bigger and more influential role in Tenchi Muyo! GXP. Seto has a particular dislike for space pirates. Seto first met Seina Yamada when his transport ship was under attack by pirates. Seeing how Seina's bad luck could be useful not only for the GP but for herself, she agrees to support Seina and have him made an exception to enter the GP Academy although he comes from an underdeveloped world (feeling like the academy could use a little chaos once in a while). Seto had also requested to Mikami Kuramitsu to have Kiriko Masaki reassigned as an instructor at the Academy in order to train Seina to become a man.
Later, when the Daluma pirate guild brought out their good luck fleet and succeed in escaping from the Mikagami, Seto had Seina deal with them. But when Seiryo Tennan was made the captain of the luckiest ship in the Daluma fleet, the Unko, knowing the Kamidake II was no match for it in its current state and that it would take too long for Fuku the cabbit, who is the power source for the Kamidake II, to mature, Seto decided to have Kiriko go through her tree bonding ceremony to merge her new tree Miyuki with the Kamidake II in order to give it the power it needs to bring down the Unko. After using her Mikagami as a test subject for this, the ceremony was performed (with her husband Utsutsumi and Emperor Azusa as witnesses) and then the plan was executed. Seto later arranged a duel between Seiryo and Seina in order to have Seiryo surrender.
Near the end of the series, after Seina brought back the mecha that he found on the Wau planet, Seto held a meeting on the Mikagami alongside Jurai Emperor Azusa and the empresses Misaki and Funaho to discuss their findings on the mecha with Seina. Seto reported that Tsunami had told her that the first generation Juraian seed which is used as the mecha's power source is actually one of the two seeds that Tsunami had given to a person that had visited Jurai long ago. Seto also announced that Seina was now part of the Jurai royal family since the seed had bonded with Seina and third in line for the throne.
Seto, has a reputation as an unofficial "matchmaker" in the Jurai empire. She has been known to arrange marriages, either to cement alliances or just to see happens for her own amusement.


== Galaxy Police ==


=== Seina Yamada ===
Seina Yamada (山田 西南, Yamada Seina) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series and serves as the main character of Tenchi Muyo! GXP, a television spinoff from the original OVAs.
Unlucky boy
Seina Yamada is a good friend of Tenchi Masaki and his parents run a small grocery at the beginning of the series. However, aside from Tenchi, Kiriko Masaki and Kiriko's brother Kai, Seina has very few friends; mostly because he has the worst luck in the universe. Minor disasters often occur in his presence, and anyone near him stays a good distance away from him. Seina's usual (lack of) luck almost ends when a spaceship nearly crashlands on his head at the Masaki residence. Its driver, Galaxy Police Detective Second Class Amane Kaunaq, had meant to present Tenchi a pamphlet for joining the G.P., but mistakenly offers Seina the application instead, under the impression that Tenchi was training the boy.
His family persuades him - via forcibly nabbing his signature and thumb print - to fill out the application, with the hope that Seina would win a prize. When he wakes from sleep what he thinks is the following morning, he finds himself aboard a spaceship, recruited to be the newest member of the G.P. Academy. He also meets Mitoto Kuramitsu, the ditzy mother of Mihoshi and cleaning lady extraordinaire, before discovering his friend Kiriko is also a GP officer. From there, Seina is thrown into a plan to stop the Daluma pirate guild from taking over the galaxy.
When Seina's bad luck was found to have an effect of attracting space pirates, the G.P. capitalized on it by placing Seina in command of one of the Decoy Fleet's newest ships, the Kamidake (which included systems designed by Tenchi's sister Tennyo Masaki). However, when the ship was irreparably damaged as a result of a prolonged chase and multiple battles with space pirates (including Tarant Shank, generally regarded as the most evil of all), Seto then presented Seina with a ship designed by Washu Hakubi, which was named the Kamidake II by Seina. The ship consist of the main ship body and a cabbit, similar to Ryo-Ohki, named Fuku by Seina. Fuku differs from Ryo-Ohki in that Fuku serves as a terminal body and more importantly, the power source for the ship, thus is not able to transform into a ship. However, according to Washu Hakubi, it is possible for Fuku to turn into a cabbit girl like Ryo-Ohki... if Fuku wishes for it as she matures.
Later, the ship became a hybrid, when under Seto Kamiki Jurai's supervision, it was fused together with Kiriko's second generation royal tree Mizuki (enabling it to generate Light Hawk Wings for protection). The main pod, which house the royal tree in a Juraian Royal Tree ship, was used for the fusion.
Battles with pirates and resulting revelations
During the time Seina commanded the Kamidake and Kamidake II, he was earning an equivalent to a fleet commander's salary. However, because he was still a cadet, that money was kept in a special account until he graduated and was given what he would normally earn. The interest the money accumulated, however, was forwarded to his family on Earth. It was so much money that the Yamada family used it to build a huge new home, as well as building a huge supermarket in place of their small grocery. While Seina was visiting Tenchi back on Earth, Amane, Kiriko, Ryoko Balta, and Neju, who was visiting at the time, worked at the Yamada's supermarket, where they were worked until exhausted.
It was later in the series when Seina, who was trying to rescue Fuku from rogue elements of the Galaxy Army, was found by a tribe of Wau, who mistake him for their savior and threw him into an ancient mecha, (which bears a striking reselance to Dual!'s Zinv). Somehow, Seina was able to activate the mecha, which he used to save not only Fuku, but also cabbit clones made from Fuku's cells by Tarant, who had allied himself with the rogue G.A. faction. Angered by this, Seina fought Shank and his allies. But in doing this, the mecha was able to integrate itself to the Kamidake II, which was captured with Fuku. And even more startling, the mecha formed Light Hawk Wings, even though it was not bonded with Mizuki.
Afterward, it was revealed by Emperor Azusa and Empresses Funaho and Misaki that the mecha (now known as Idol) had as its power source a first generation Jurai tree seed, with the seed bonding itself with Seina. As a result, Seina is now third-in-line to the Jurai throne, behind Yosho and Tenchi. Thus, a political marriage between Seina, Amane, Kiriko, Ryoko Balta, and Neju was arranged for political reasons. Seina is initially very disposed against what he thinks is an attempt to force the girls into marrying him, but is later persuaded that they are doing so out of their own free wills.
However, before the ceremony could begin, two incidents occurred. First, Shank had broken into Seina's dressing room, hoping to kill the boy. Luckily, Shank's impaitence gets the best of him and Seina was able to subdue him. Also, Seto's ladies-in-waiting - Gyokuren, Hakuren, Karen, and Suiren - who were actually agents of the Renza Federation seeking to use Seina's abilities to rid their home from marauding pirates, kidnapped Seina into their small ship and began to molest him in a public broadcast to ensure the Renza Alliance's political bond with the Jurai Royal Family. As a result, the four are included into the marriage as well as the crew of the Kamidake.


=== Minami Kuramitsu ===
Minami Kuramitsu (九羅密 美瀾, Kuramitsu Minami) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series and is only a character in the OVA continuity.
Minami Kuramitsu is the father of Mitoto Kuramitsu, as well as the grandfather of Mihoshi Kuramitsu and Misao Kuramitsu and the Grand Marshal of the Galaxy Police. The Kuramitsu family is one of the most powerful families on the planet Seniwa, and is very dominant in the Galaxy Police.
Minami first appeared briefly in the first OVA series, where he reported to the GP commander that the criminal Kagato had returned. After that, the commander found the only officer close by is the Marshall's granddaughter Mihoshi, much to his dismay. Her superior officer Nobeyama then tried unsuccessfully to tell her to not engage Kagato, to avoid the Marshall's wrath if he were to find out that Mihoshi were in danger.
In the third OVA series, it is shown that since Minami loves his granddaughter greatly, so much so that when he received a letter (altered by Z), saying that she was being abused by Tenchi Masaki, Minami quickly dispatched her younger brother Misao aboard the Choubimaru, a huge ship owned by the Kuramitsu family, to rescue Mihoshi, and destroy the Earth to kill Tenchi. Minami went through with this plan, despite a warning from the military officer Nakita, that since the Earth is an undeveloped world, he would risk having the Earthings see it. Nakita also delivered a message from Minami's sister Mikami, that she will sell one of his gardening planets to Lady Seto should the Choubimaru be damaged in the attack, much to Minami's dismay.
In the final episode of the third OVA series during the meeting to pass judgement on those involved in the Choubimaru incident, by Mikami's judgement, Minami is demoted to the position of The Head of Maintenance at the GP spaceship dock as his punishment. When Misao had decided to marry his assistant Mashisu Makibi, at first Minami protested that she was unworthy of marrying into the Kuramitsu family, but was shocked when Mitoto had announced her support and that she was able to get the family council’s approval for the wedding.
Minami has also made a few cameo appearances in Tenchi Muyo! GXP, where he not only welcomed Seina Yamada to the Galaxy Police, but he and his maintenance crew had also serviced Seina's ship the Kamidake a few times.


=== Misao Kuramitsu ===
Misao Kuramitsu (九羅密 美咲生, Kuramitsu Misao) is a fictional character from the anime Tenchi Muyo! in the official Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki continuity, appearing in both the third OVA series, as well as its spin-off the Tenchi Muyo! GXP series.
Misao is the younger brother of Mihoshi Kuramitsu. In the third OVA series Misao had received a letter from Mihoshi, which said that Mihoshi was doing all these things with Tenchi Masaki. Remembering that he once heard that Tenchi is surrounded by women, Misao interpreted that Mihoshi was in a harem and was being abused by Tenchi (the letter was altered by Z originally, and later by Fuku). Because of his concern that Mihoshi would suffer a repeat of what had happened before (which wasn't elaborated in detail), Misao decided he had to kill Tenchi to save his sister.
In order to accomplish this, his grandfather the Grand Marshal Minami Kuramitsu had given Misao command of the Kuramitsu's family's newest ship, the Choubimaru, which had the capability to destroy an entire planet. The plan was lure to Mihoshi and Tenchi to the Choubimaru for a banquet, and to avoid having Mihoshi hate him, Misao would make Tenchi's death look like an accident. Misao would then accidentally destroy the Earth during their fight with Ryoko to avoid the general panic on Earth that the Choubimaru would cause when the Earthlings see the Choubimaru. When Misao had contacted Mihoshi to invite her and Tenchi on the Choubimaru, Mihoshi didn't remember that she had a brother, until Misao displayed one of his old photographs which was when Mihoshi immediately recognized him. Misao then made his invitation, but before Tenchi and Mihoshi could go, Mihoshi had gotten a call from her friend Amane Kaunaq, who wanted to find out Tenchi's intentions on joining the Galaxy Police. Since an interference field was deployed around the Masaki house (deployed to make the capture of Ayeka, Ryoko and Washu easier) made the call a problem, Tenchi and Mihoshi went into Washu's lab so that they could get better reception.
Although Misao was a competent officer, he's insecure and unsure of himself. His is also easily intimidated, as evident when Mashisu Makibi spanked him for calling her a lowly servant. He was also unaware that Mashisu was in love with him. But Misao became aware of this when Mashisu helped snap him back to his senses when he was prepared to go down with the Choubimaru during Ryoko's attack and she had shielded him with her body during an explosion.
It was then Mashisu, who had apparently suffered a fatal injury, reminded Misao that they originally met, when Misao had accidentally hit her with a tennis ball and he admitted that he had apologized for what he did back then, although she was too lovestruck to have heard it and that she was happy to have been introduced to Misao's family. Misao realized that he couldn't forgive himself if Mashisu had died because she was important to him. Luckily, the destroyed section of the Choubimaru, as well as Mashisu's injuries, were an illusion created by Washu on Tsunami-fune, which was borrowed by Seto to show Misao that it is Mashisu and not Mihoshi that he should protect. When Mashisu ran off in embarrassment, Misao was convinced by Noike, Ayeka, Sasami, Washu and Seto to go after her, but Misao accidentally stepped on Mihoshi's face by mistake when he went after her.
After the Choubimaru incident, Misao, along with grandfather Minami and Mashisu, were brought before his great aunt Mikami, and got a punishment of ten years service in one of the family's ventures. Misao accepted his punishment gracefully, but not wanting to be separated from his beloved Mashisu had asked her to marry him. Minami at first objected to this, saying that Mashisu was unworthy, but Misao married her when Misao's mother Mitoto brought the announcement of the family council's support for their wedding, as well as Seto's offer to adopt Mashisu, so that she could be worthy of marrying Misao.
Misao also made an appearance in GXP episodes 23 and 24. By then, Misao's punishment was modified and he became an officer in the Galaxy Army. Misao had also had gained greater confidence in his abilities. After Seina Yamada was accused of stealing the Kamidake II, when he was ordered to turn it over to the Galaxy Army, Misao with his unit had detained his former teacher Amane Kaunaq (Amane had trained Misao and still refers to him as "Rookie"), as well as Kiriko Masaki, Ryoko Balta and Neju Ne Melmas, under the charge that they were accomplices. But unknown to them, Misao was secretly working undercover for Mikami to expose a rogue faction of the G.A. that was aiding the space pirate Tarant Shank, to learn the secret of Fuku, the cabbit that powered the Kamidake II. This showed when Misao allowed the girls to stay in a castle owned by the Kuramitsu family on planet Seniwa that had a computer which they could use to solve the case.
Right after Seina had defeated Tarant, Misao went to report back to his corrupt G.A. superiors, but had actually brought Mikami and an armed escort of G.A. officers to arrest them.


=== Sabato ===
Operative A (Sabato) (冴羽人, Sabato) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series, exclusive to the 1996 movie Tenchi the Movie: Tenchi Muyo in Love.
Sabato is a special operative within the Galaxy Police, assigned to deal with serious criminals. He was a survivor when Kain broke free of his bonds and destroyed the GP Headquarters, drawn back to 1970 with Kain by the fugitive's energy. Aware of Kain's vendetta against those with the Jurai power - namely Achika Masaki and her father Yosho - he watches the former more out of feelings of retribution than her own well-being, waiting for Kain to make his move so he may kill the criminal himself.
Posing in a human disguise to hide his Wau features, Sabato was keeping an eye on Achika by posing as a student in her class. When Ryoko noticed what he was doing, she eventually confronted him and Sabato revealed his true identity to her by identifying that he knew her criminal status. After explaining everything to Ryoko, Sabato then pointed out that he will catch her after he is done with Kain. Sabato made a vain attempt to kill Kain during his attack on Achika at Tokyo Tower, and he was easily killed by him.
Sabato possessed a cybernetic left arm, which could be modified, depending on what opponent he faced. When he confronted Ryoko, it was a simple blaster easily disguised as a normal hand. However, when he faced Kain, Sabato had a more powerful laser cannon mounted to it.


=== Mashisu Makibi ===
Mashisu Makibi is a fictional character in the anime series Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki, as well as Episode 17 of Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter.
Background
Mashisu Makibi first appeared in Episode 16 of the third Tenchi OVA as Misao Kuramitsu's assistant on board the Kuramitsu family's newest starship, the Choubimaru, which had the capacity to destroy an entire planet. But Mashisu was not Misao's first choice for second-in-command: he had requested Noike Kamiki Jurai for that post, but at the last second, Mikami Kuramitsu had Mashisu fill-in.
Mashisu deeply wishes for Misao not to go through with his terrible plan, which was to use the Choubimaru to rescue Mihoshi Kuramitsu and the Jurai Royal Family from Tenchi Masaki's clutches (as Misao saw it), then in a battle with Ryoko, the ship's main battery would 'malfunction' and blow up Earth and killing Tenchi in the process. Mashisu, knowing that the early civilization residents of Earth were liable to go into a panic seeing a spaceship the size of Earth's moon approaching the planet (in actuality, the letter which informed Misao of Mihoshi's "plight" was altered by Z, in the hopes this incident would occur), tried to reason with Misao to modify his plans, if not for himself, but to spare the pain of having Mihoshi resent Misao because of Tenchi's death. She even went as far as spanking Misao, mostly to spare him the embarrassment of being seen by his crew with a black eye.
Unable to dissuade Misao from his plans, Mashisu secretly came up with an alternate plan by framing Ryoko Hakubi for the destruction of the Choubimaru. What it involved was that she, along with her subordinates Baguma, Fujimasa, and Sorunaru, would cause the ship's destruction by provoking Ryoko (using some minor offenses still on her record as a justification; her major crimes were deleted) to attack it. During the battle, the ship's core would accidentally overload and explode. This way, she could avoid having to destroy the Earth, not to mention avoid hurting both Misao and Mihoshi over Tenchi's death. Baguma, Fujimasa and Sorunaru were then dispatched to handle Ryoko, Ayeka, and Washu, while Mashisu would go after Sasami.
A plan gone wrong
However, Ryoko, Ayeka (with Ryo-Ohki’s help) and Washu were easily able to handle Fujimasa, Sorunaru and Baguma respectively, while Sasami easily defeated Mashisu with skills that Mashisu was ill-equipped to handle, and helped her notice that she is in love with Misao. The group was then taken on board Sasami's ship, Tsunami-fune. It was on board Tsunami-fune that Seto Jurai treated the five to an impromptu party, which involved plenty of the rare libation Shinju sake
However, when Ryoko began attacking the Choubimaru in a drunken rage (she had consumed an entire barrel of sake after her battle with Fujimasa, and the Choubimaru was no match for Ryo-Ohki anyway), Mashisu became so concerned about Misao's safety that she rushed back to his side. Mashisu confronted Misao on the Choubimaru's bridge, and was able to help him come to his senses and order the crew to abandon ship. However, it took a little longer for Mashisu to persuade Misao to join the crew... which resulted in Misao trying to shield Mashisu from an explosion.
Apparently injured fatally by the blast, Mashisu helped Misao remember the day they had first met and she fainted admitting that she is in love with Misao. On that day, Misao had accidentally hit Mashisu on the head with a tennis ball. Although Misao had appoligized for the incident, Mashisu was so enrapured with the young boy she didn't hear the apology, and gave Misao a vicious headlock as a result. But afterward, Misao had invited Mashisu to lunch with his family, where she met Mihoshi. She also made mention of an unknown incident (possibly the one that caused Mihoshi's downfall within the Galaxy Police) which caused Misao to mature.
However Mashisu's injuries were actually an illusion created by Washu on Tsunami-fune, to help Misao understand the importance of who he should protect. Mashisu, as well as Misao, were surprised to find that the 'explosion' was actually a transport beam, and Mashisu was embarrassed that everyone had heard them and her confession to Misao.
A future with the Kuramitsu family
After a modified resolution to the Z incident, Mashisu was punished by Mikami Kuramitsu with six months of toilet cleaning in the G.P. headquarters for her part in the Choubimaru incident. When Misao wanted to have Mashisu with him for his portion of the punishment (ten years working in one of the family's ventures, however only one's spouse is allowed to go to the family venture), she was dismissed by Mikami’s brother Minami Kuramitsu as "unworthy". However, Seto, who was also present, offered to adopt Mashisu so that she could marry Misao. This part was confirmed when Misao and Mihoshi's mother Mitoto (mop in hand) showed up and informed everyone that she got the Kuramitsu Family's counsel to accept the marriage.
Mashisu also appears in GXP episode 15. After her punishment for the Choubimaru incident had ended, she married Misao and became Mashisu Kuramitsu. Apparently as a wedding present, Mashisu was given command of the Choubimaru, with Misao going to the Galaxy Army. She was able to help out when Fuku had taken command of the Kamidake II when she ran away to Earth. Mashisu was enraged when the Kamidake II was attacked by pirates of the Daluma guild, frightening Fuku to tears. Mashisu, along with help from Fuku's big sister Ryo-Ohki, chased off the pirates.


=== Mitoto Kuramitsu ===
Mitoto Kuramitsu (九羅密 美兎跳, Kuramitsu Mitoto) is a fictional character in the anime series Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter.
Background
Unfailing cheerful, Mitoto Kuramitsu is the daughter of Minami Kuramitsu, as well as the mother of Mihoshi and Misao Kuramitsu. Mitoto works as sanitation engineer (read: cleaning lady) for the Galaxy Police. She met Seina Yamada when he was first taken from Earth to the G.P. Academy, and was taken by Seina's crew-cut, which she constantly pets. Since then, Mitoto would be occasionally popping into Seina’s life from time-to-time, often helping him out during certain events in the boy’s life (like the time Seiryo Tennan held up Seina’s body enhancements so that the boy could wash-out, where she supervised Seiryo in cleaning toilets as part of his punishment).
Mitoto shares certain traits with her daughter Mihoshi, namely her odd luck and carefree, yet clueless attitude. Also, Mitoto seems to have the odd habit of appearing in places where you least expect her to be; sometimes on a G.P. battle cruiser or a pirate ship, where she would be cleaning away without a care in the world; she even appears for a moment on board the original Kamidake, but is taken for an illusion brought on because at that time the crew are starving for lack of food.
There is a running joke that she knows almost everyone in the galaxy because she cleans for them. She has even been in General Daluma's "secret" fortress, and remarked on the cleanliness of its floors.
Other than appearing in the GXP series, Mitoto also made a brief appearance in the final episode of the third Tenchi Muyo OVA series, when she approved of Misao's proposal to Mashisu Makibi and had convinced the Kuramitsu family council to approve of the wedding.


=== Fuku ===
Fuku (福) is a fictional character in the anime series Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter.
Background
Fuku first appeared in the episode "Neju Who?". She is a cabbit, a small, rabbit-like creature that hatched from an egg in the Kamidake II, Seina Yamada's ship and was given her name by Seina himself. She is the younger sister of Ryo-Ohki, the daughter of Washu. Like Ryo-Ohki she is the biological computer-unit and, at first, the principle power source of the Kamidake II, which can fluctuate depending upon the mood of Fuku. Her appearance is identical to her sister's when she first hatched in the 3rd episode of the OVA. One characteristic that distinguishes her from Ryo-Ohki is the small bell on her neck which she received from Seina. She later shared this responsibility when Kiriko Masaki Jurai was bonded to the second-generation tree Miyuki, which gave Fuku help in powering the Kamidake II to battle against the Unko of the Good Luck Fleet.
Fuku is deeply devoted to Seina, and that devotion is clearly demonstrated by her willingness to help him, despite the fact that sometimes she can be easily frightened. Seina was also the first one to truly care for her by paying attention to her and demonstrating his faith in her, and Fuku also has a good relationship with Neju Na Melmas and hangs around with her when she is not with Seina. She also shares her big sister's love of carrots. Washu also explained to Seina that although Fuku is incapable of transforming into a human-like form like Ryo-Ohki could, Fuku could with the proper raising be able to gain this ability as well.
Fuku, as well as the Kamidake II, were also briefly taken away by a corrupt faction of the Galaxy Army that were aiding Tarant Shank in order to analyze her for their own personal desires and placed Fuku into a stasis field. The G.A. scientists attempted to clone Fuku, but could only produce imperfect clones. Eventually Seina was able to rescue Fuku, as well as the clones.
Fuku also made a brief appearance in Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki, when at the end of the nineteenth episode, she accompanies Noike Jurai, who alters the message to Mihoshi's family (that Z had originally altered) in order to keep the timeline in correct order, so Noike would be able to meet Tenchi and Fuku (who also didn't want the timeline adversely affected) would eventually meet Seina.
One thing to note, is that the cabbit appearance Ryo-Ohki adopted resulted from Ryoko integrating the remains of Neko-chan, a little cat she had been keeping alive after it had died before Tenchi released her. So while Ryo-Ohki's appearance is a side-effect of the integration, Fuku's own was modeled after the integrated Ryo-Ohki.


== Manga Only ==


=== Dark Washu ===
Dark Washu (闇の鷲羽, Yami-no-Washū) is a fictional character in Tenchi Muyo!, a recurring character in Hitoshi Okuda's The All-New Tenchi Muyō! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Origins
Dark Washu began her life as the "Dark Crystal", a device which Washū Hakubi created approximately 5,000 years prior to the events of Tenchi Muyō! Ryō-Ohki. The Dark Crystal was a self-evolving artificial intelligence program with the rather unusual purpose of attacking its own creator by any means it could devise, in order to provide a worthy opponent to test the "perfect" security system that Washū was attempting to create. When Washū was sealed away by Kagato, the Dark Crystal had not yet been activated. However, it was discovered by Washū's jealous colleague Doctor Clay, who subverted the system to pursue his own grudge against her. When his attempt to abduct Washū on behalf of Tokimi was thwarted, just before being delivered to a Galaxy Police prison, he activated the Dark Crystal with orders to kill Washū. Shortly after its activation, the Dark Crystal reconfigured itself into an android copy of Washū, except with dark skin, purple eyes, and pale purple hair. This gave her most if not all of Washū's superhuman powers, theoretically allowing for an even contest. She also claimed that her personality was a copy of Washū's.
Rather than attempting to attack Washū in secret, "Dark Washu" (as it called itself) instead openly announced her presence and intent. She followed this up almost immediately by attempting to kill Washū with a garrote, and then with a hand-held energy cannon. After being physically assaulted by Ryōko for the second attack (which if successful would have killed Tenchi as well), Dark Washū concluded that a continuation of direct attacks would soon destroy the Earth, and instead proposed a best of five competition between herself (and four duplicates) and Washū's "team", with the type of contest in each round being randomly determined. The first round, a cooking contest, was easily won by Sasami, but Dark Washu cheated to defeat Ayeka and Ryōko in a shōjo manga trivia contest and a foot race, respectively. Mihoshi tied the competition in a contest of drawing lots, leading to the final round: hand to hand combat between Washū and Dark Washū. Dark Washū used deceptive tactics, such wearing boxing gloves to present the impression of a boxing match and then using kicks, but was still defeated by her creator. She then conceded defeat and exposed a shut-off switch to Washū.
However, at this point an orbital satellite left behind by Doctor Clay fired on Washū, and while it was proptly destroyed by Ryōko, the satellite placed a more sinister personality, a copy of Clay contained within his removed left eye, in control of Dark Washū's body. Clay told Washū that he would continue attacking the entire Masaki household unless she would erase their memories and confront Dark Washū alone on Europa. Though Washū obeyed this demand, Minagi arrived on Earth shortly afterward and was able to get Tenchi, Ryōko, and Mihoshi to remember Washū's existence. They arrived on Europa just in time to prevent Dark Washū from inflicting a killing blow. Afterward, Dark Washū's true personality was able to reassert itself, weakening Clay's hold, and Washū defeated her with a German suplex. Clay's copy attempted to retaliate with a proton bomb, but Washū had already disarmed it. Minagi then destroyed Clay's eye, eliminating the copy forever. When Washū expressed reluctance to deactivate Dark Washū, the android grabbed her hand and forced her to do so.
Tama
Following Dark Washū's defeat, Washū repaired and reprogrammed her as Tama (玉) to serve as a lab assistant. Tama appeared to be a smaller, more childlike version of Dark Washū and wore a red and white maid's outfit. When questioned as to why she had restored the former villain, Washū responded that "cute characters don't grow on trees", implying that this was done largely on a whim. This was supported by the fact that she installed a very powerful self-destruct device in Tama-chan because "it seemed amusing".
Tama-chan generally got along well with the other members of the Masaki household, but behaved antagonistically toward Ryōko, seeming to mimic Ryōko's own behavior toward Ayeka. Ryōko challenged Tama-chan to a fight, with the loser being required to leave forever. However, Tama's self-destruct device was accidentally activated, causing her to forfeit the fight and flee into deep space. Upon realizing the reason for Tama's actions, Ryōko pursued her and sliced Tama-chan in half, leaving behind her lower body (which contained the bomb) and bringing back her head and upper body to be repaired by Washū. Though Ryōko was still annoyed by Tama's attempts to steal her food, she no longer objected to the girl's presence. Tama-chan has since played a minimal role in the story.


=== Garyu ===
Garyu is a brief villain in the No Need for Tenchi graphic novel series by Hitoshi Okuda. He appears in the volumes Ayeka's Heart and No Need for Endings. Garyu is the prince of the distant planet called Oku II. Garyu kidnapped Ayeka from Earth through hyperspace and the Tenchi gang began their search for their beloved Ayeka.
The motive for this kidnapping is that Garyu has a burning passion for Ayeka, the origins of this come from when he visits Jurai on a diplomatic trip. Garyu criticizes that Jurains are foolish to keep trees and plants for aesthetics and oxygen saying they take up too much space. Two children were playing with their pet bird nearby and the bird flew towards Garyu. Garyu without hesitation smashes the bird to the ground. Ayeka sees this and demands Garyu to apologize. Garyu senses Ayeka's strength and presence intrigues him but he refuses to apologize. Ayeka furious walks up to him and slaps him in the face. This was the first time he had ever been hit. Everyone had always feared his power and ability but not Ayeka. He has never stopped thinking of Ayeka ever since and his passion for her brings him to kidnap her and brainwash her to love him.


=== Mikamo and Yataka ===
Mikamo (箕鳧) and Yataka (耶鷹) are fictional characters in the Tenchi Muyo! franchise, currently exclusive to Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media
An unequal partnership
Yataka is officially a "space pirate", though it might be more fitting to refer to him as a "space hijacker" - a crook among crooks who scavenges others' quarry after they've done the lay-work for him. While he puts on fierce airs, Yataka is not truly cut out for the pirating business, as while he is a liar and a thief he's on occasion too timid to kill in fear of the attention it might draw from the Galaxy Police or the Jurai Royal Family. Despite all this, he has an inflated opinion of himself and his abilities, and is quick to belittle others and suffer for his underestimations.
Mikamo is his traveling companion, a sentient robot who acts as A.I. of their spaceship. Yataka likes to think of himself and the machine as partners, but Mikamo has his own agenda: he agrees to play along with the pirate, their deal being "Yataka takes as many things as he wants and Mikamo will enjoy its little hobbies"... that being torture and dissection. Though Yataka poses as the group's spokesperson, Mikamo is the real power behind the scenes, having the thief completely at his mercy.
Business arrangements
They intercept Ryoko and the others as they journey through space, Mikamo uncovering that they're after an awesome treasure - a Juraian Royal Tree she failed to acquire eight hundred years ago when she was under Kagato's control (Ryoko's only known failure aside from her raid on Jurai). Though blasted by Ryo-Ohki, a transmitter placed on the ship leads them to an uncharted planet shielded from outside tampering and discovery. Mikamo fires on Tenchi and the others from above as Yataka makes good his plan to steal the tree, only to meet up with the tree's guardian Ibara. The pirate's ridicule of others based on first impressions gets him in trouble again, and he flees when he see his technology is helpless against a "piece of stick".
His partner has substantially better luck: Mikamo cloaks itself as Sasami and feigns distress to draw the girl's sister Ayeka into striking distance. Its foul play gaining them a hostage, Mikamo orders Yataka to tell the group they have three hours to hand over the treasure for the princess, elsewise the robot might appease its sick urges. However, Mikamo schemes to have its fun even after obtaining the prize, going so far as threatening Yataka at knifepoint for suggesting otherwise.
Before either can go back on the bargain, Washu devises a way to neutralize their ship's shield, allowing Ryoko to teleport inside. Mikamo takes a cheap shot to try to atomize both women as she and Ayeka quibble over the rescue, before at last bristling over Yataka mewling there was no reason to do such a thing. "Tired of baby-sitting poser criminals", Mikamo decides to slaughter his "useless partner" but is blasted mid-stance by Ryoko, blowing a hole through the A.I. and the side of the ship.
Last resorts
Mikamo grows increasingly enraged as he fires repeatedly from orbit, his attempts at reprisal blocked by Tenchi and his Light-Hawk Wings. When Ayeka, Ryoko and Ibara take out his gun torrents the machine grows even more adamant, choosing to sacrifice itself and the ship by bringing it down on his enemies' heads. Through the power of the Light-Hawk Wings working in tandem with Ryoko and her gems, their combined strength halts Mikamo's kamikaze effort, able to stop even the mass of the falling starship.
Unrelenting, the vengeful A.I. chooses to take itself down and drag Tenchi and the others to hell with him, initiating the ship's self-destruct sequence. Taking his frustrations out on Yataka (long past ready to throw in the towel), Mikamo screams at his uselessness as a pawn, although he's quick to stop in the face of something even more maddening - Tenchi wanting to put an end to the fighting by daring to show him mercy.
The countdown reaches zero, and as the ship explodes Ryoko and Tenchi take the full brunt of the impact. Collectively they're able to smash the extraordinary amount of mass into harmless particles instantaneously, saving the planet and everyone on it. Still functional, the machine makes one final play for murder but is ultimately destroyed by Ryoko, as "some guys just don't know when to quit".
His eminence, "Lord Yataka", survives the ordeal, though after being betrayed, losing his ship, and getting blown up and taken into custody hardly gets off easy.


=== Minagi ===
Minagi (巫薙) is a fictional character in Tenchi Muyo!, a recurring character in Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! and The All-New Tenchi Muyo! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Minagi's name is taken from the Minagi railway station in Japan.
Origins
Minagi looks almost exactly like Ryoko (with the exception of two crescent-shaped scars across her cheeks), and for good reason - from a genetic standpoint she could be considered the space pirate's daughter. However, she considers herself more a younger sister than anything else. Minagi was created artificially when Yakage, an apprentice of Washu, stole a sample of Ryoko's DNA and spliced it with his own. While similar in both appearance and abilities to her "mother", the two couldn't be any more different in personality: Minagi is highly enthusiastic, polite to a fault, and shows no interest in alcohol. They do share one important quality, however; both women are devoted to those they love unto death.
She acts as Yakage's protégé and servant, confronting Tenchi and the others shortly after their battle with Kagato at her master's behest. She suffers from amnesia after a tussle with Ryoko as a result, but while recuperating befriends the entire group. She and Sasami share a particularly close bond. Minagi regains her memory while fighting Yakage, wanting to keep her newfound friends out of danger and remember her past. While very hurt she doesn't mind dying at her master's hand, pleased to have done what she could to help her father create the perfect sword (unknowingly, one Yakage meant for Minagi to wield).
She survives the encounter, and now decides to follow in Ryoko's footsteps as a space pirate while still living by Yakage's teachings. However, her activities are more akin to the stories of Zorro or Robin Hood than to Ryoko's former career, targeting "bad cargo ships and government officers" (sic).
Space pirate?
Unfortunately, Minagi is still often mistaken for her notorious sister, with a case of mistaken identity with Asahi Takebe getting her involved in an issue with Yume and The Shima Brothers. Yakage had come into possession of one of the three Hielzen-S swords ("Kageba, the Shadow Blade"), but the sword was taken from him by Hishima, who had threatened Minagi's life lest it was handed over. Upon trying to retrieve it, the current owner Yume was unsympathetic to the past wishes of a dead man, ordering Hishima to dissuade Minagi by force. Though she survived the incident she is severely hurt trying to save Asahi's ship, but is well enough to recover under Washu's care (with the generous "donations" of blood and marrow from Ryoko helping matters further).
Minagi later captures an animal smuggler who was en route to deliver a Mitsu, and also helps the gang remember Washu, who under the orders of the Dr. Clay controlled Dark Washu had sealed their memories of her to cause her distress. Following Ryo-Ohki's signal to Europa, they eventually confront Dark Washu together, and after Washu defeats her robot copy, the missing left eye of Clay that acted as his back-up breaks away, only to be destroyed by Minagi for the harm its caused her friends.
Other versions
Clones of Ryoko have popped up several times in Tenchi Muyo! animation and literature over the years. The original OVA series Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki later used the concept for Zero. In 1997, an American comic published by Pioneer wrote of a more sinister offshoot named "Inferno".


=== The Shima Brothers ===
The Shima Brothers are a fictional trio of villains in the Tenchi Muyo! franchise, featured in Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! and The All-New Tenchi Muyo! manga series, licensed and distributed in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Origins
They are henchmen in the service of Yume, an old classmate and rival of Washu's during her academy days. The Shimas owe their existence to Yume, having been bio-engineered by the scientist to serve her purposes; and so are utterly devoted to their master and her goals. Together they initiated a series of events to acquire the fabled Jurai Book of Secrets, manipulating the Tree Sculptor of Jurai's Royal Family Tatetsuki's strings from behind the scenes and using his authority to their advantage. They are as committed to each other as they are to Yume, and are able to pass on their core units (devices recording their past experiences and skills) in death. Each brother is completely cloaked, save for a mask and their hands when they attack.
Mushima
Mushima is the oldest of the three and wears a dark green cloak to distinguish himself from his kin. His body is thin, with exposed wires running across his bladed fingers and a mask that only reveals his right eye (left in the flipped English manga). While comparatively squat by his siblings' standards (roughly the size of an adult human), Mushima's arms have extraordinary reach for his frame, as he uses them to slash opponents with great speed with his claws.
He is originally stationed on Ryuten, a sister planet to Jurai, the world that governs the universe. Mushima pleads permission from his brother Hishima to go on assignment to capture Asahi Takebe; a young woman who would prove useful as a bargaining chip to wring information out of her father. Given leave so long as Asahi's brought back alive and unhurt, Mushima is all too happy to go: while nauseated by the "stink" of the tree-planet, he hopes to gain enough favor in completing the mission to eventually usurp control.
Tracking Asahi's ship Mimasaka's co-ordinates to Earth, Mushima curses the waste of talent like his on such a backwater planet. But after being made a fool of by Katsuhito Masaki while trying to ascertain Asahi's whereabouts, Mushima reveals the last wrinkle in his genetic make-up - his body is host to two personalities, one a scheming, disreputable dirt-bag, and the other that of an honorable warrior who enjoys fighting those superior to himself. His right arm is severed in the ensuing fight, though Mushima leaves without incident - he compliments Katsuhito on his skill and hopes one day their paths and blades will cross again.
Mushima finally tracks down his quarry in space, before long backhanding Asahi in a shot meant for Ayeka. As he chortles to himself on how he's gone against orders, the act draws the wrath of the monk Gohgei, who transforms to reveal himself as a Gagutian, a nearly extinct bestial race of great speed and power. Shifting back to his second persona, Mushima swears to leave the group alone in peace should he fail; it's long been his life's dream to trade blows with a Gagutian.
Ultimately, Mushima falls. Though at first insulted, Gohgei assures the creature he means him no slight by not finishing the job; had Mushima's arm been in top condition, the outcome might have been different. Conceding total defeat, Mushima asks forgiveness for having raised a hand against the ladies, and Gohgei asks they meet and fight once more when they are both in top physical condition.
Grievously injured from scrapes with two accomplished warriors in so short a time, Mushima uses the last of his strength to return to his brothers. He refuses repair, as "a shattered weapon, no matter how completely restored, has flaws that will eventually reveal themselves", instead sinking his claw deep within his chest and pulling out his core. He asks Hishima to accept it into his own, and thus, satisfied, leaps to his death on Ryuten. His younger brother swears that, through him, Mushima will fight again.
Hishima
Hishima is at the center in both age and height, but out strides all others in terms of power. He is visibly humanoid, clad in red with a mask that only reveals his left eye (right in the flipped English manga). His true lineage is kept under wraps until the final battle of their story arc. Hishima has a personal code of ethics he always tries to hold to, so long it doesn't interfere with his master Yume's wishes: he has strong feelings of honor and fair play, avoids killing if at all possible, and believes in keeping one's word and not attacking the helpless or the weak. However, should his master give an order that differs with his usual guideline they will be dropped, as requests from Yume are absolute.
While Yume slept within Bizen, Hishima headed preparations for her takeover of Jurai. He first acquires one of the three legendary Hielzen-S swords (weapons forged with a will) from the scientist Yakage, who had wanted to research "The Shadow Blade Kageba" to help reach his own aspirations. Yakage's daughter Minagi blames herself for its loss, as the swordsmith hands it over to facilitate her safety after Hishima threatens her life. He then finds the perfect foil for obtaining the Juraian files in Tatesuki, a man resentful of Nomori Takebe being given the title of Royal Tree Sculptor other than himself. By exploiting Tatetsuki's jealousy, Hishima uses hypnosis to control him like a puppet: Nomori is framed for the previous sculptor's death and locked away until he divulges the hidden files' location. Attempts are made to track down and seize Takebe's daughter Asahi as a hostage, while all traffic from Ryuten is closed off from Jurai, a second Shima, Mushimas takes on the task of finding the girl personally.
Hishima maintains order until Mushima returns, fatally wounded over the course of battle. At his brother's request, Hishima takes his core into himself, inheriting his soul, speed, and thirst for another battle with Gohgei. Finally, Asahi comes into their keeping when she is caught unawares when Tenchi and the others attempt a rescue. Nomori admits the secrets are kept within his daughter's spaceship Mimasaka under duress, as Hishima only observes Gohgei - the circumstances are hardly conducive to a fair contest. Onboard, Tatesuki uses the last of his reason to fight off Hishima's mental hold and keep from breaking the seals that bind them, forcing the creature to get physical and plunge his finger into the back of the pawn's head, now asserting total control.
Their captives escape in the resulting commotion, but Hishima has Takashima leave them be - the violence is unnecessary; they've got what they came for. Shortly thereafter, Yume awakes, but rather than being grateful for her underlings' work in her absence she's cold, belittling their efforts in the face of her own abilities, not their own. Minagi confronts them and asks they return her late master's sword, a request Yume is unwilling to acquiesce. The command is then given to Hishima to attack. The creatures asks that she reconsider, to forget the sword and go: "to end your life over an obligation to the dead -- it's a meaningless act". However, Hishima can't disobey orders, and when Minagi refuses to give in ("fighting for someone important to you is never meaningless!") he's forced to strike her down, hoping to one day be forgiven.
Hishima finally gets permission to settle accounts with Gohgei when Washu and Yume agree to a physical contest to resolve their age-old bet. His true nature is unveiled as to why he is Yume's masterwork - Hishima is a walking war machine based on the Gagutian life form. He is able to take the abilities of his opponents and make them his own, and - as a self-evolving mechanism with Mushima's added agility and skills - Hishima enhances those techniques as such where they always surpass the original.
Tenchi stands to shield Gohgei from a final attack, and on seeing the heir to Jurai Hishima recalls one like him through Hishima - Katsuhito. He accepts Gohgei's concession of defeat - as the monk now means to protect the person important to him, Asahi, regardless of the disgrace - as noble, and fights Tenchi in his stead. Despite his strength, Hishima is unable to duplicate the Light Hawk Wings, and the warrior is consequently thrown into Bizen, causing the tree to cave and its systems to malfunction. He works together with the others to help right his and Yume's wrongs and save the galaxy from what could have been total collapse as a result. After seeing the death of Takashima and how Hishima cares for her, Yume relents on her past doings, realizing how lonely she truly was. He is no longer treated as just another disposable minion, but as an equal and valued friend.
He and Yume make several other appearances in the series, first invited to an onsen by Washu. Hishima informs his master on the finer points of the "cleansing ritual" at a hot spring, though he himself is baffled on why someone proper like Ayeka would be averse to seeing him in the buff, writing off his lumps as just another part of the bathing ceremony. Later, the two gather intelligence and help to oppose Sara, an A.I. who became a threat to Washu and the others.
Takashima
Takashima is the youngest and tallest of the Shimas. He drapes a blue cloak over his bulky, cybernetic build, with a mask that reveals no facial features, not even his eyes. He is mostly silent and a follower, communicating only via unintelligible shouts of "glah".
He accompanies Hishima throughout their task on Ryuten, doing what he can to procure the secret files of the Jurai Royal Family for his master. It is Takashima who rips the information free of its place on Mimasaka, allowing Yume the ability to control the royal tree Bizen. Later, he shocks both his brother and creator by showing he can speak, stepping in to avenge the late Mushima by fighting Gohgei. But the latter has grown even stronger since then, and Takashima is quickly dispatched, knocked aside with one blow.
Damning her fallen creation for shaming her, Yume plants a kick to the scruff of the "worthless bucket of bolts" neck, calling him little more than a pawn and pile of rubbish. Even so, when Bizen is toppled during the climactic scuffle between Hishima and Tenchi, Takashima rises to save Yume, taking all the weight of the falling tree on his neck and back. Before they give out (a result of the prior kick), Takashima shoves Yume to safety, sacrificing himself for her protection. Yume is distraught over the loss: she had never meant for anyone to give their lives for hers.


=== Yakage ===
Yakage (矢蔭) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! franchise and the first major antagonist of Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Swordsmith He is a Juraian scientist who specialized in swords and swordplay, and even designed the energy sword used by Ryoko. Like Kagato, Yakage studied under Washu as one of her personal assistants at the Galactic Academy, but possessed a greater sense of honor and loyalty than the future "Ruins Buster". Despite this, he was not without ambition or obsession, and Yakage became immersed into creating a sword of immense power, one that would be strong enough to even overcome the Lighthawk Wings.
To reach that goal, Yakage abandons Washu, stealing some of Ryoko's DNA and mixing it with his own. He began raising and training his Ryoko, named Minagi, to be a superior warrior, planning for her to be the wielder of this "ultimate sword". Though harsh - and on occasion, brutal - in his teachings, Yakage genuinely cares for Minagi, only wanting his daughter to be prepared for whatever trials she might face in the future. The full extents of his research are still unknown, but he did discover many powerful blades, some so valuable they were sought by others themselves (and subsequently taken from his possession). The culmination of his work was a dual-bladed, artificial Lighthawk Sword.
Yakage managed to stay for thousands of years to further his studies by cloning himself each time he was near death, training Minagi in the ways of swordsmanship all the while. However, the cloning wasn't perfect, making each version of the scientist weaker than the last. Cell degeneration had set in, and with Yakage growing sickly - bad off enough to suffer spurts of coughing up blood at points - Minagi confronted Tenchi and the others on Earth. She attacks them knowing that they were the one who defeated Kagato, thinking research on Tenchi's sword would help her master achieve his greatest wish. However, Minagi was beaten by Ryoko, and was stricken with amnesia as a result.
New test subjects
His protégé missing, Yakage comes to earth along with his two guardians, Kuze and Hakkou, interested in seeing the power of the Lighthawk Sword. During this encounter, Kuze and Hakkou easily dispatched Tenchi, and Yakage, lecturing the boy about his lack of focus, took Ayeka prisoner in order to entice Tenchi into facing him with his full force. Though Yakage is mindful of taking the girl (as she is First Princess of Jurai), as a scientist he must use whatever means are necessary to carry out his research.
Ryoko failed in her attempt to defeat Yakage alone (to keep Tenchi from having to fight him), so Tenchi and the others quickly headed off to Yakage's ship to take him down. Through fighting with him, Minagi's memories gradually return, and after seeing the scar on his face - something Yakage kept as a memento of the first time Minagi bested him in combat - she remembers everything. Minagi allows herself to be cut down by Yakage's final strike, desiring to help achieve his dreams and make her father happy. Yakage had never told her that he only wanted to prove the sword's abilities in combat so he could give it as a gift to her.
Final analysis
Still unwilling to waver with Minagi's sacrifice, Yakage refused to quit until he and Tenchi have a final match, for the sake of both his research and his daughter. The scientist tries to goad the boy into battle by threatening Ayeka and Ryoko's lives, as a shield surrounding them will eventually kill them unless Yakage himself dies first. As they fight, Washu reveals that this Yakage is a copy, as he's been repeating himself millennium after millennium, overwriting his knowledge and appearance until his body could no longer withstand the constant degeneration.
Not wanting to kill Yakage - despite knowing the scientist's life was nearly at its end - Tenchi and his friends were put into serious jeopardy themselves. Ryoko breaks free of her bonds to save Tenchi from Yakage's deathblow, but it's not until the scientist levels his weapon at Ryoko that Tenchi shows his true power. The two then trade sword strokes, with Yakage cleaved in two by the inferiority of his artificial sword against the genuine article. Having done his best as a scientist and warrior, Yakage's only regret is that he won't be able to pass the sword along to Minagi, as he bids the group a final farewell.


=== Yume ===
Yume (夢) is a fictional character in Tenchi Muyo!, a recurring character in Hitoshi Okuda's The All-New Tenchi Muyo! manga series, published in the U.S. by VIZ Media.
Yume attended the Jurai Science Academy at the same time as Washu Hakubi. Yume graduated second in their class, with Washu ranked first. Unlike Doctor Clay, Yume was actually considered by Washu to be a legitimate rival whose intelligence was worthy of respect.
In addition to their intellectual competitions, Yume also engaged in drinking contests with Washu at a bar near the Academy. After one of these contests shortly before Washu's capture by Kagato, the highly inebriated geniuses agreed on a contest to see who could conquer the Jurai Empire first, with the loser becoming the winner's slave. While Washu passed out afterward and promptly forgot about this wager, Yume dedicated herself entirely to winning the competition. She created three powerful warriors, the Shima Brothers, to carry out her plan, and stole the 2nd-generation Jurai royal tree Bizen. Yume then placed herself in suspended animation to wait for them to acquire the Jurai Book of Secrets, which contained information she needed to control Bizen's powers.
When the Shima Brothers finally awakened Yume, she was angry that they had taken 7200 hours longer than she had predicted. Yume also declared herself to be "the greatest scientific genius in the universe", a title which Washu also frequently claims. She proceeded with her plans, using information from the Book of Secrets to activate Bizen and launch the enormous tree into space. Mihoshi's spaceship Yukinojo, which had secretly followed her to the planet Ryuten, was the first to encounter Bizen, and was quickly overcome by the tree's Light Hawk Wings. Yume left Yukinojo intact so that Bizen's appearance would become known to Jurai.
In response, Jurai's queens Funaho and Misaki deployed the entire Jurai fleet to recover the stolen tree. However, Washu was able to locate Yume first, and challenges Yume with a new wager: a fighting competition where if Washu wins the previous contest is cancelled, while if Yume wins Washu will become her slave. Instead of fighting herself, as Washu had hoped, Yume instead sent Takashima and Hishima to fight on her behalf. Tenchi and the monk Gohgei volunteered to represent Washu. While Gohgei easily defeated Takashima, he proved no match for Hishima. Tenchi then stepped up to fight Hishima, but their battle was interrupted by the arrival of the Jurai fleet. Yume used Bizen to seize control of the Jurai warships, but Tenchi resumed the fight with Hishima to force her to give up. With his Light Hawk Wings, Tenchi was able to defeat Hishima, causing a large branch from Bizen to fall toward Yume. At the last moment, Takashima sacrificed himself to save his master, leaving Yume distraught, as she had never wanted anyone to die for her.
The damage to Bizen caused the tree to completely lose control, initiating a chain reaction that could potentially destroy the entire universe by detonating itself and all the other royal trees of Jurai. Yume worked together with Washu in an attempt to avert this crisis, and they realized that the only way to stop the chain reaction is to kill Bizen. However, before they could complete their task, an enormous extradimensional energy distortion, resembling a black hole, formed around Bizen. However, at that point Tsunami appeared and averted the crisis. Washu convinced the Jurai queens to allow Yume to go free, and later she and Hishima visited an outdoor onsen on Earth at Washu's invitation (resulting in the onsen being destroyed and rebuilt twice).
Yume and Hishima returned in Volume 8 ("Brain Drain") of The All-New Tenchi Muyo! when they brought a group of Academy underclassmen to meet Washu. Among them was an 18-year-old named Sara, an apparent klutz who immediately challenged Washu to a duel in the Virtual Arena with the condition that the loser would serve the winner. Sara lost and moved into the Masaki house to become Washu's new assistant (displacing Tama). However, Yume became suspicious and investigated Sara, learning that the real Sara had died 1,000 years previously but had been absorbed by a being composed of accumulated data and that the current Sara had a secret agenda involving merging with Washu to obtain the power of a god. Yume transported Tenchi and Ryoko into the Virtual Arena to rescue Washu where they had to battle duplicates of themselves; Washu, bolstered by Tenchi and Ryoko's courage and determination, also fought back against Sara's control. Sara was overwhelmed by emotions left over from the original Sara and allowed her consciousness to be deleted, sending Tenchi, Washo and Ryoko back to the real world. Later, Yume found what was left of the data entity in a corner of Washu's lab.


== Others ==


=== Asahi Takebe ===
Asahi Takebe (建部 旭, Takebe Asahi) is a fictional character from the Tenchi Muyo! franchise, a girl with past ties to Juraian princesses Ayeka and Sasami in Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! manga.
Past and personality Asahi is the only daughter of Nomori Takebe, a wood sculptor from Ryuten, one of the sister planets to Jurai. Aside from being a luxurious planetary resort, Ryuten is the sole proprietor of the giant trees used by Jurai's royal family. Craftspeople of the planet shape and carve the wood for use as prodigious spacecraft, with the master sculptor given the highest seat of authority.
She first met Ayeka and Sasami when the two princesses visited to the vacation spot, and they all became close friends (with Sasami loving her like a little sister). Always a fool for skilled craftsmanship, Asahi is ready to carve at the drop of the hat, with a veritable barrage of sculpting tools on her person at all times. She's especially attached to Mimasaki, a sentient A.I. and spaceship that she fawns over at all times. Culinary-wise, Asahi in the kitchen is something to be feared, as her dishes tend to be on the nuclear side (five tubes of wasabi a dish for "tang"). Aside from the cook herself, the only person who can stomach Asahi's cuisine is Gohgei, a young monk who watched over her as a child.
Gohgei is actually the only boy her father let Asahi associate with growing up. Nomori smothers her in a way; after her mother died his daughter is all he has in life. To dissuade her from striking up a relationship, he spins yarns on how "all men -- aside from me -- change into scary monsters and eat little girls up!" While she knows it's not true ("since at least a year ago!") Asahi has a psychosomatic allergy as a result, and will pass out if so much as touched by a guy.
Escape from Ryuten Her father was imprisoned by a rival named Tatesuki, over jealousy in not being named royal sculptor in lieu of Nomori after the previous master's death. She's unable to seek help from Jurai after Tatesuki has all traffic to the area closed, and Asahi is sought as leverage to make her father speak by three strange men. Making a break for it, the young girl runs into a snag when she mistakes the "space pirate" Minagi for her more notorious sibling, and she and Mimasaki crashland on Tenchi Masaki's front doorstep.
During the surprising reunion, Asahi fills Ayeka and Sasami in on the current goings-on on Ryuten, and eager to assist, Tenchi and the others set off to free her father from imprisonment. The journey is not without incident, though; Mimasaka is put into a drunken binge by Mihoshi halfway to their destination, forcing an unscheduled stop on Yatsuka (a mining planet in the Jurai Empire). Gohgei is picked up there while the group is detained, and after six hundred years apart the monk and Asahi fall for each other, though neither acts on their crush (Asahi is worried she'll never viewed as anything but a "little sister"/Gohgei is concerned over the age difference and the girl's feelings). Matters are compounded when Mushima tracks them down - though Asahi seems more upset over the scratching of her "pretty ship" than capture - and lashes out towards Ayeka. Asahi pushes the princess out of the way, taking the full force of the creature's backhand. While she's unconscious, Gohgei jumps to her defense, unveiling himself as a beast-like Gagutian.
Curious cures Though saved from Mushima, Asahi is eventually caught and used as collateral to expunge the location on Jurai's secret files from her father. Nomori begrudgingly cooperates, admitting the book is hidden deep within his daughter's ship. Once the files are obtained, she and the others are able to escape, though Mimasaka is left with the Shimas on Ryuten. Minagi, understanding what it's like to lose something precious to you, puts herself in danger to retrieve it, even as the A.I. concerns itself for her safety.
Thankful for all the sacrifices made by her friends, Asahi decides to stay with Gohgei and do her part to stop Yume, an old acquaintance of Washu's, from taking over the Jurai Empire. Feeling being beside Gohgei was the best protection, she supports everyone even after her father's rescue. During Gohgei's fight with Hishima, the girl wonders why Gohgei doesn't transform, revealing she understood all along ("Oh, don't tell me you didn't know!") allowing the monk to fight to his full potential without fretting how Asahi will hate him.
She is unknowingly cured of her allergy when rushing to Gohgei's aid, and after matters with Yume are finished the couple settles down on Ryuten. She succeeds in her career as a professional carver, with her and Gohgei due to be married in the near-future.


=== Sakuya Kumashiro ===
Sakuya Kumashiro (神代 佐久耶, Kumashiro Sakuya) is a character from Tenchi in Tokyo / Shin Tenchi Muyo.
History
Sakuya Kumashiro has been rated 3 on Temangu High's "Must Have List" by her male classmates. However, it is newcomer Tenchi Masaki that gets her attention. On one of his first days, she chooses to sit next to him at lunch, much to the envy of the other guys. Over the course of the series, the two become closer, culminating in the school carnival, where the two share a kiss while Ryoko is watching, causing Ryoko to run away for much of the series' remaining episodes.
Sakuya has strong feelings for Tenchi, and, in the end, her love becomes so strong that she cannot bear to be without him. This only gets stronger when Sakuya has a great realization near the end of the series. Yugi keeps a close eye on her, and Sakuya seems to be involved in her plans.
Sakuya goes through a big change when, in a later episode, Tenchi realizes that Sakuya has never spoken about her home, her parents or anything about her past. Sakuya brushes off the question like always, but this time she becomes aware of the fact that she cannot remember anything about herself. In her life, all that has mattered is Tenchi, and she has not thought of any of it.
Sakuya begins breaking down, and clings to Tenchi even tighter. The two spend a great deal of time together, and Sakuya tells Tenchi she loves him, asking him if he loves her. He is unable to answer for the time being and wants longer to think about it.
He does not get much time, though. Yugi, who has been watching her, keeps saying that she does not understand her. The little child cannot comprehend the romantic feelings of the older girl, and the actions it causes. Yugi destroys the crystal in her inner sanctum that represents Sakuya, and Tenchi finds that his school friends have no idea who she is. Tenchi runs off in search of her, but cannot find a trace of her anywhere.
Tenchi returns home and receives a phone call from Sakuya, who has been walking in the city, feeling empty and alone. The two spend the day together in the beach, sharing a kiss there, and Tenchi returns home to find Washu and his grandfather Katsuhito waiting for him. They explain that Washu has made a discovery about Sakuya: she is another persona of Yugi, a shadow or reflection of her as a young woman that she created (although her actions and Yugi's confusion by them shows that Sakuya has a mind of her own). Tenchi refuses to believe it at first, but after Washu shows him her data which is a definitive proof, he runs to Sakuya's house. When he makes it there, he finds Yugi, who had moments before taken Sakuya back into herself after revealing the truth to her.
When Tenchi confronts Yugi, Yugi places him in a dream world, where he can be with Sakuya forever. Distraught upon the loss of Sakuya and his guilt upon confronting the other girls after their fight at the carnival, Tenchi goes along with this after the Sakuya of this world, which is supposedly nothing but Yugi's puppet, speaks to him alternately with Yugi's voice and then her own, and he finds himself unable to hurt Sakuya.
The two share some time together, and Tenchi finally gives Sakuya the answer to the question she had asked earlier: taking her into her arms, he tells her that he's thought about it and realized that he loves her too. They kiss, but this makes Sakuya break free of Yugi's mind control, so she tells Tenchi that he has to go back to the real world and save everyone. Then, Sakuya says she will never be alone anymore since Tenchi gave her memories to hold on, so she willingly fades away into nothingness and sets him free so that he can restore everything to the way it once was.
Ryoko has hypothesized at the end of the series that, since Sakuya is Yugi's shadow, the now sleeping Yugi might grow up to be Sakuya when she wakes up. However, some fans have hypothesized that she would not grow into Sakuya, but could use her powers to bring Sakuya back instead. If either of these does happen, it will certainly make the competition for Tenchi's heart that much more heated.


=== Mayuka ===
Mayuka (麻由華, Mayuka) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! series, appearing in the 1997 movie "Tenchi Muyo! Manatsu no Eve", released by Pioneer in the U.S. as "Tenchi the Movie 2: The Daughter of Darkness.
Mayuka was created by the Juraian demoness, Yuzuha, using her and Tenchi's DNA, and was sent to the present time, posing as Tenchi's future daughter. Upon Mayuka's arrival, Ayeka and Ryoko took an immediate dislike towards her, but Sasami begins to like her, and even promised her that they would celebrate Christmas together. Mayuka began to develop her emotions at this point, much to Yuzuha's disgust. Yuzuha began to manipulate her to resume her old mission of kidnapping Tenchi. Curiously, she has the ability to project either an actual Lighthawk Wing or a similarly powerful plane of energy as a weapon, as shown when Ryoko tried to interrogate her.
Once Mayuka's true nature was revealed, Yuzuha ordered Mayuka to kidnap Sasami, forcing Tenchi and Ryoko to go after her (Yuzuha) instead. She battled Tenchi and Ryoko, cutting Tenchi up with her claws whilst Yuzuha watched, but in the end, Sasami got through to her. Mayuka managed to break free of Yuzuha's control and attacked her, clawing out her right eye and saying that she didn't want to fight. She was "killed" by Yuzuha in retaliation for her disobedience, but after he defeated Yuzuha Tenchi brought Mayuka's crystal to Washu, and they all agreed to revive her as an infant, thus allowing her to celebrate Christmas with the gang (with Ryoko, with whom Mayuka had previously clashed, vowing to train Mayuka up right).


=== Hiwa Takahashi ===
Hiwa Takahashi (高梁 日羽, Takahashi Hiwa) is a fictional character in the Tenchi Muyo! franchise, a close acquaintance of the title character who makes an appearance in Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! manga.
Unexpected visitor Hiwa and Tenchi are old friends, almost inseparable from the time they were six years old. They spent most evenings having fun and playing games together (even "Doctor"), going so far as adopting a little injured bird they named Ukan. Unfortunately, Hiwa's father moved to Osaka, and being so young with no income of her own Hiwa was obliged to follow. However, she never stopped caring about Tenchi, and years later shows up on the Masaki's doorstep looking to continue their relationship and even marry him, as she had promised when she was a little girl.
Unfortunately, things aren't so clear-cut as they seem: Hiwa is not quite herself, not in the flesh anyway. After some cajoling from Washu, she explains that two days earlier she had been hit by a speeding car, left bruised and broken on the side of the road. The first thing Hiwa sees afterwards is herself laying on a hospital bed, with the doctor telling her parents the girl only had days to live. Somehow Ukan, the bird she and Tenchi had taken care of and Hiwa still looked after, was able to lend its body as an avatar to Hiwa's spirit and brought her to Tenchi. She arrived to be pleased yet also extremely saddened to see Tenchi surrounded by people who loved him. Unfortunately, Hiwa is too far gone for Washu to heal her, causing the scientist to scoff how the "greatest genius in the universe" can't even save a single girl.
The test
Knowing she won't have much time left, Hiwa wanted to test Ayeka and Ryoko to see if their love for Tenchi was true by subjecting them to illusions generated by one of Washu's inventions. The final test for Ayeka was being told Tenchi wasn't really family and being threatened to lose her title of princess unless she returned to Jurai; meanwhile Ryoko broke up her dream date with Tenchi and decided to help a pregnant woman she had met make it to the hospital by using her powers, expressly against Tenchi's wishes. Both made the right choice, and now knowing their love for Tenchi was sincere Hiwa departs an angel, thankful to know there were those who would love and care for him as she did once she was gone.
Unable to accept that Hiwa is gone, Tenchi has an idea of someone who could save their friend where Washu could not. Sasami is able to use her power as Tsunami to bring back Hiwa, restarting her heart moments after death. Doctors and nurses are shocked by her recovery as Hiwa is embraced by her parents while white feathers still fall from the sky.


=== Kazuma Kagato ===
Kazuma Kagato (加賀戸 カズマ, Kagato Kazuma) is a fictional character in Tenchi Muyo!, specifically Hitoshi Okuda's No Need for Tenchi! manga series, published in the United States by Viz Media.
Master chef Though he is the spitting image of the space pirate Kagato, Kazuma has little to do with the criminal outside of looks. He is the two-time reigning champion of the highly regarded "Viva with Cooking!" game show, and intends to extend that streak even with Sasami as his primary competition. His father, Mr. Kagato, is set on Kazuma taking over the family business, a famous restaurant in Ginza the Kagatos have run for four generations. But his son only cooks to gain his dad's attention and has no interest in becoming a professional chef, and unknown to his father has a "Retire from Cooking Announcement Plan", set to be implemented once Kazuma wins three times in a row.
Tome, the second cook of the restaurant, goes to Sasami with a request; throw the match, as Kazuma might be used as a puppet by his dad for the rest of his life otherwise. After talking to Washu, she decides against it, as not only would it be bad to lose on purpose, but it'd be rude to Kazuma as well.
The three-part competition begins, and while she has a brief moment of doubt Sasami decides to do her best, no matter the outcome. The two exchange wins in the opening rounds, with Sasami edgeing out Kazuma in dishwashing and the boy scoring a buzzer-beating victory in a cooking quiz. Seeing his son's chances at a third championship in jeopardy, Mr. Kagato decides the fix should be in, sabotaging Sasami's ingredients by injecting a carrot with "the dreaded MSG". "It's better to cheat than lose", after all.
Final rounds and decisions
The championship is a two-hour stir-fried vegetable cook-off, the outcome deciding the ultimate winner. Kazuma has a slim lead going in to the final round, Sasami and a boy named Asari the only remaining challengers. Though tipped off to the outside interference by Ryo-Ohki, Sasami refuses to believe Kazuma would ever cheat. While she's preoccupied, Asari - ashamed to be losing to an eight-year-old girl - does some damage of his own, intentionally knocking Sasami over and causing her to chip her cutting knife. Kazuma sees the trick and confronts Asari, demanding the boy apologize to Sasami for his cheating, much to Mr. Kagato's chagrin.
A helping hand (literally) from Ryoko allows the match to continue, and at the end of the day Kazuma loses a close contest to Sasami, losing his title. Kazuma's father is ashamed, and becomes especially irate over his son's wishes not to succeed him as chief chef at their restaurant. Calling Kazuma a "failure", his father insists on deciding his future for him, just as that life path was thrust on him twenty years ago. The trade talk is interrupted by Washu, who with a well-placed picture and the discarded syringe reveals the elder Kagato's ploy to Toma and Kazuma.
Kazuma and Sasami leave on good terms, looking forward to cooking together again. As they drive back to the restaurant, the boy tells his father (somewhat cowed by the whole experience) how impressive he thought Sasami was, particularly in the face of all the rigorous training they've gone through. Choosing his own destiny for the first time, Kazuma wants to study even harder to give Sasami the best match he can when next they meet. Proud of his son and finally realizing children aren't puppets on their parents' strings, the two leave to practice cooking together.


== External links ==


== References ==