This list lists achievements and distinctions of various Presidents of the United States. It includes distinctions achieved in their earlier life and post-presidencies.


== George Washington ==
First person to serve as President of the United States.
First President born in Virginia.
First President to appear on a postage stamp.
First President to be a Freemason.
First (and, to date, only) President to receive votes from every Presidential elector in an election (in both the 1789 and 1792 elections; each elector voted for Washington and for another candidate).
First President to add "So help me God" to the Oath of Office 
First (and, to date, only) sitting President to command a standing field army (during the Whiskey Rebellion).


== John Adams ==

First President born in Massachusetts.
First President to live in the White House.
First President to have previously served as Vice-President.
First President to have previously served as an Ambassador to a foreign country.
First President to be a lawyer
First President who had never served in the military.
First President who attended one of the Ivy League colleges, and first to attend Harvard College.
First (former) President who was widowed (His wife Abigail died in 1818, and he outlived her for eight years).
First President to have children.
First President whose son (John Quincy Adams) was also a President.
First President to receive the oath of office from a Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court
First President to veto no bills while in office.
First President to have a child die while in office.
First President to be defeated for a second term in office.
First President to live to the age of 90.
First President to have signed the Declaration of Independence 
First President to command an active navy for the entirety of his presidency. 
First President to die on Independence Day (Along with his Vice President & successor Thomas Jefferson)


== Thomas Jefferson ==
First President to be inaugurated in Washington, D.C.
First President to live a full presidential term in the White House.
First President to have previously been a Governor
First President to have previously served as Secretary of State
First President to be elected by defeating another President.
First President to defeat a person (Adams) whom he had previously lost to in a Presidential election
First President to have been widowed prior to his inauguration (His wife Martha Jefferson died in 1782, long before he was inaugurated)
First President whose election was decided in the House of Representatives.
First President to cite the doctrine of executive privilege.
First president to have a vice president elected under the 12th Amendment. Originally the runner-up in the presidential election was named vice president 
First President who died on Independence Day (Along with his President and predecessor John Adams).


== James Madison ==
First President to have served in the United States House of Representatives
First President to ask Congress for a Declaration of War.
First war-time Commander in Chief
First President to have an Inaugural ball.
First President to wear long trousers instead of knee breeches.
First President to issue a pocket veto.


== James Monroe ==
First President to have served in the United States Senate
First President to have a child marry at the White House.
First President to ride on a steamboat
First President to receive more than 200 electoral votes in a single election.
First President to be physically accosted while in office (by Treasury Secretary William H. Crawford, who attempted to hit him with a cane).


== John Quincy Adams ==

First President to be the son of another President (He was the son of John Adams).
First President elected despite losing the popular vote.
First President to have facial hair.
First President to have his photograph taken.
First President to serve in Congress after serving in the Presidency.


== Andrew Jackson ==
First President born after the death of his father (His father died in an accident three weeks before he was born).
First President born in a log cabin.
First President to marry a divorcee.
First Democrat elected to the Presidency.
First (and, to date, only) President to kill someone in a duel.
First President to be targeted by an assassin.
First President to ride on a railroad train.


== Martin Van Buren ==
First President born in New York state.
First President born after the Declaration of Independence
First (and, to date, only) President who spoke a language other than English as his first language.
First President who met with the Pope (as the former President).


== William Henry Harrison ==
First Whig elected to the Presidency.
First President to receive more than one million popular votes in a single election.
First President to have 10 or more children.
First President to give an inaugural address of more than 5,000 words.
First President to have his photograph taken while in office.
First President to die in office.


== John Tyler ==
First Vice-President to ascend to the Presidency by the death of his predecessor.
First President to have a veto overridden.
First President to face a vote of impeachment in the House (it was unsuccessful)
First President to be widowed while in office.
First President to re-marry while in office (to Julia Gardiner Tyler)
First (and, to date, only) President to have served as President pro tempore of the Senate.
First President to be born after the ratification of the United States Constitution.


== James K. Polk ==
First President to be elected to the office before reaching the age of 50.
First (and, to date, only) President to have served as Speaker of the House of Representatives.
First President to be elected despite losing his states of birth and residence.
First President to be nominated by his party as a dark horse.
First President to die before reaching the age of 60.
First President to predecease his mother (He died in 1849, and his mother outlived him for three years, finally dying in 1852).


== Zachary Taylor ==
First President who had served in no prior elected office.
First President to serve in the Mexican-American War.
First President to take office while his party held a minority of seats in the U.S. Senate.


== Millard Fillmore ==
First President to have a bathtub installed in the White House.
First President to establish a permanent White House library.
First President born after January 1, 1800


== Franklin Pierce ==
First President born in New Hampshire.
First President to install central heating in the White House.
First President born in the 19th century
First sitting president to seek renomination by his party but be denied it.


== James Buchanan ==
First President born in Pennsylvania.
First (and, to date, only) President to be a bachelor.


== Abraham Lincoln ==

First President born outside of the original 13 colonies and first born in Kentucky.
First (and, to date, only) President to hold a patent.
First President to be photographed at his inauguration.
First President to be assassinated.
First Republican elected to the Presidency.
First President to receive more than two million popular votes in a single election.
First President to appear on a U.S. coin
First President to wear a beard.


== Andrew Johnson ==
First President to be impeached by the House of Representatives.
First President to serve in the United States Senate after being President.


== Ulysses S. Grant ==

First President born in Ohio.
First President educated at the United States Military Academy.
First President to win the popular vote by more than 500,000 votes.
First President to have both parents live into his Presidency (His father died in 1873, and his mother died in 1882).
First President to veto more than fifty bills.
First President to publish his memoirs.


== Rutherford B. Hayes ==
First President to hold a state Thanksgiving dinner.
First President to hold the White House Easter Egg Roll.
First President to have a telephone and a typewriter installed in the White House.
First President to visit the West Coast of the United States while in office.


== James Garfield ==
First President to be left-handed or ambidextrous.
First President to die before reaching the age of 50.


== Chester A. Arthur ==
First President born in Vermont.
First President to take the oath of office in his own home.
First President to have an elevator installed in the White House.


== Grover Cleveland ==

First President born in New Jersey.
First President to get married at the White House.
First President to have a child born in the White House
First (and, to date, only) President to serve non-consecutive terms.
First President to be filmed.
First President (with Harrison) to receive more than five million popular votes in a single election.
First President to veto more than 100 bills, veto more than 200 bills, veto more than 300 bills, or veto more than 400 bills.
First President to issue more than 100 pocket vetos.


== Benjamin Harrison ==
First President to have a lighted Christmas tree at the White House.
First President to be a grandson of another President (W. H. Harrison)
First President (with Cleveland) to receive more than five million popular votes in a single election.
First President to have electric lighting installed in the White House.
First President to make a sound recording.


== William McKinley ==
First President to ride in an automobile (the electric ambulance that carried him to the hospital where he died).


== Theodore Roosevelt ==
First Vice-President who ascended to the Presidency upon the death of a predecessor who later was elected to the Presidency in his own right.
First President (and first American) to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
First President to ride in a submarine and an airplane
First President to travel outside the United States while in office (to the Panama Canal Zone).
First President to receive more than 300 electoral votes in a single election.
First President to win a presidential election by more than 2 million popular votes.
First President to have his offices in the West Wing.
First President (and, to date, only) to earn the Medal of Honor.


== William Howard Taft ==

First President to throw out a ceremonial first pitch
First President to own an automobile (He in fact owned four while in office)
First former Solicitor General to become President.
First President to preside all of the 48 contiguous states (Arizona and New Mexico were admitted to the Union under his Presidency).
First President to visit Mexico while in office
First President to use the Oval Office
First (and, to date, only) President to also serve on the United States Supreme Court (as Chief Justice).
First President to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery


== Woodrow Wilson ==
First President to have a Ph.D.
First President to visit Europe while in office.
First President to meet with the Pope while in office.
First President to give a radio address.
First President to hold a press conference or regular news briefings.
First President to appoint a Jew (Louis Brandeis) to the Supreme Court.
First President to attend a World Series game.
First (and, to date, only) President to be buried in Washington, D.C..


== Warren G. Harding ==
First President to receive more than ten million popular votes or 400 electoral votes in a single election.
First sitting U.S. Senator elected to the presidency.
First President to win the popular vote by more than 5 million.
First President to ride to and from his inauguration in an automobile
First President to visit Canada while in office
First President to predecease his father (He died in office in 1923, and his father outlived him for five years, finally dying in 1928).


== Calvin Coolidge ==
First (and, to date, only) President to be sworn in by his father (following the death of Harding).
First President to be sworn in by another President (Taft, who was Chief Justice at the time of Coolidge's 1925 inauguration).
First President to give a radio broadcast from the White House.
First (and, to date, only) President to visit Cuba while in office.
First President to claim Native American ancestry.
First and only President born on Independence Day.


== Herbert Hoover ==
First President born west of the Mississippi River and first born in Iowa.
First President to receive more than twenty million popular votes in a single election.
First President to have a telephone on his desk.
First President to have a post-presidency of more than 30 years.


== Franklin D. Roosevelt ==
First (And per the 22nd amendment, only) President to serve more than two terms.
First President to be inaugurated on January 20.
First President to be elected after losing as Vice-President on a major party ticket.
First President to have a physical disability.
First President to appear on television
First President to nominate a woman (Frances Perkins) to a Cabinet post.
First President to establish a presidential library
First President to receive more than 500 electoral votes in a single election.
First President to win the popular vote by more than 10 million votes.
First President to veto more than 500 bills.
First President to issue more than 200 pocket vetos.
First President to visit South America, Africa, the Soviet Union and Hawaii while in office.


== Harry Truman ==
First President born in Missouri.
First President to be assigned a Secret Service codename.
First President to serve in World War I.
First to have an nationally-televised inauguration.
First (former) President to be issued a Medicare card.


== Dwight D. Eisenhower ==
First President to serve in World War II, and only President to serve in both World Wars
First President to be born in Texas.
First President to celebrate his 70th birthday while in office.
First President to travel by jet and helicopter.
First President to give a televised news conference.
First President to appear on color television.
First President of all 50 states (Alaska and Hawaii were admitted during his Presidency).
First President to visit India.
First President to be term-limited due to the 22nd Amendment.


== John F. Kennedy ==
First (and, to date, only) Catholic to serve as President.
First President born in the 20th Century.
First President (along with Richard Nixon) to participate in televised Presidential debates.
First President to have been a Boy Scout
First (and, to date, only) President to be awarded a Pulitzer Prize.
First President to have previously served in the United States Navy
First (and, to date, only) President to earn a Purple Heart.
First sitting President to have a brother serve in the Senate (Ted Kennedy) and another brother (Robert Kennedy) serve in the Cabinet.
First President to be inaugurated in the presence of both his father and mother.
First (and, to date, only) President to be survived by both his parents (His father outlived him for six years, finally dying in 1969, and his mother outlived him for more than three decades, finally dying in 1995).
First (and, to date, only) President to be survived by a grandparent (His maternal grandmother outlived him for nine months, finally dying in August 1964).
First (and, to date, only) President who died on the same date as his assassination attempt occurred.
First President to use the Situation Room.


== Lyndon B. Johnson ==

First President to be inaugurated on an airplane.
First President to be sworn in by a woman (Sarah T. Hughes).
First President to visit Australia while in office.
First President to win the popular vote by more than 15 million votes.
First President to ride to and from his inauguration in a bullet-proof limousine (to and from his second inauguration).
First President to appoint an African-American (Thurgood Marshall) to the Supreme Court.
First President to appoint an African-American (Robert C. Weaver) to a Cabinet post.


== Richard Nixon ==
First (and, to date, only) Vice-President who did not immediately succeed his President (Eisenhower).
First President (along with Kennedy) to participate in televised Presidential debates.
First President born in California.
First President to visit the People's Republic of China and Israel while in office.
First (and, to date, only) President to resign from the Presidency.
First (and, to date, only) President to be pardoned by another President (Ford).


== Gerald Ford ==

First President born in Nebraska.
First President to ascend to the Presidency without being elected to either the offices of the President or Vice-President.
First (and, to date, only) President to be an Eagle Scout
First President to visit Japan while in office.
First (and, to date, only) President to pardon another President (Nixon).
First President to release a full report of his medical checkup to the public.


== Jimmy Carter ==
First President born in Georgia.
First President born in a hospital.
First (and, to date, only) President to attend the United States Naval Academy.


== Ronald Reagan ==
First President born and raised in Illinois.
First President to receive more than fifty million popular votes in a single election.
First (and, to date, only) President to have been divorced.
First (and, to date, only) President to have been a professional actor.
First (and, to date, only) President to be the head of a union (the Screen Actors Guild).
First President to appoint a woman to the Supreme Court (Sandra Day O'Connor).
First President (sitting) to visit the New York Stock Exchange, March 28, 1985.


== George H. W. Bush ==
First Vice-President to have served as Acting President (when Reagan was sedated for eight hours due to colon surgery).
First President to have served as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency or United States Ambassador to the United Nations.
First former President to live through his son's entire presidential administration. (His son George W. Bush took office in 2001 and left in 2009, and he is still alive).


== Bill Clinton ==
First President born in Arkansas.
First President to send an e-mail.
First President whose inauguration was streamed on the Internet.


== George W. Bush ==
First President born in Connecticut.
First President to have State of the Union live broadcast on the Internet
First President to have been the son of a President who was alive throughout his presidency (His father George H. W. Bush lived throughout his presidency, and is still alive).


== Barack Obama ==
First President born outside of the 48 contiguous states and first born in Hawaii.
First African-American to serve as President.
First Multiracial American to serve as President.
First President to publicly endorse same-sex marriage.
First President to appoint a Hispanic-American to the Supreme Court (Sonia Sotomayor)
First President to appoint multiple women to the Supreme Court (Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan).
First President to address both houses of the British Parliament.
First sitting President to visit a federal prison while in office.


== References ==


== External links ==
Presidential Firsts
Inaugural Firsts
List of Presidential birthplaces, libraries, museums and graves