A Change of Seasons is a 1980 American dramedy film directed by Richard Lang. It stars Anthony Hopkins, Shirley MacLaine and Bo Derek.


== Plot ==
When fortysomething Karen Evans discovers her arrogantly self-centered professor husband Adam is having an affair with student Lindsey Rutledge, she retaliates by having a dalliance of her own with young, philosophical campus carpenter Pete Lachappelle. Adam is infuriated when he learns about his wife's new relationship, and she in turn defends her right to enjoy the same carnal pleasures he does. The four decide to share a Vermont ski house, where their efforts to behave like liberal adults are tested by middle-aged angst, hurt feelings, and teenager Kasey Evans, who unexpectedly arrives to confront her parents with their outrageous behavior.


== Production notes ==
The film was shot on location in Glenwood Springs, Colorado and Williamstown, Massachusetts. Hopkins and MacLaine famously did not get along during the filming and Hopkins said “she was the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with."
The theme song "Where Do You Catch The Bus For Tomorrow?" was written by Alan and Marilyn Bergman and Henry Mancini and performed by Kenny Rankin.
Originally, Noel Black was hired to direct after producer Martin Ransohoff saw his film, A Man, a Woman, and a Bank (1979). Black left the film during shooting due to creative differences. He was replaced by Richard Lang. Black shot the first half of the film only.
Consenting Adults was the film's working title.


== Principal cast ==
Shirley MacLaine ..... Karyn Evans
Anthony Hopkins ..... Adam Evans
Bo Derek ..... Lindsey Rutledge
Michael Brandon ..... Pete Lachapelle
Mary Beth Hurt ..... Kasey Evans
Edward Winter ..... Steven Rutledge
K Callan ..... Alice Bingham


== Critical reception ==
In his review in the New York Times, Vincent Canby said the film "exhibits no sense of humor and no appreciation for the ridiculous … the screenplay [is] often dreadful … the only appealing performance is Miss MacLaine's, and she's too good to be true. A Change of Seasons does prove one thing, though. A farce about characters who've been freed of their conventional obligations quickly becomes aimless."
Variety observed, "It would take the genius of an Ernst Lubitsch to do justice to the incredibly tangled relationships in A Change of Seasons, and director Richard Lang is no Lubitsch. The switching of couples seems arbitrary and mechanical, and more sour than amusing."
TV Guide rates it one out of a possible four stars, adding the film "is as predictable as a long Arctic winter, and just about as interesting … Marybeth Hurt … steals what there is of the picture to steal."
Time Out London calls it "kitsch without conviction, schlock without end … glib trappings … and witless dialogue sink everything except for the perky intelligence of MacLaine, who clearly deserves better than this."
The film is rated M in New Zealand, "Suitable for mature audiences 16 years and over."


== Awards and nominations ==
1st Golden Raspberry Award
Nominated, Worst Actor (Anthony Hopkins)
Nominated, "Worst Original Song" - For the song, Where Do You Catch the Bus Tomorrow? (Henry Mancini, Marilyn Bergman, Alan Bergman)
Nominated, "Worst Screenplay" - Erich Segal, Ronni Kern, Fred Segal


== References ==


== External links ==
A Change of Seasons at the Internet Movie Database
A Change of Seasons at AllMovie
A Change of Seasons at the TCM Movie Database