The Shaky Isles or Shaky Islands is a nickname for New Zealand. At one time this nickname was used in New Zealand itself, though it's usage there is now seen as dated; it is still fairly widely used in Australia.
The term derived from New Zealand's frequent seismic activity. The islands lie on the margin of two colliding tectonic plates, the Pacific and Indo-Australian Plates. Earthquakes are common, particularly in the southwest of the South Island and in the central North Island, and the North Island's scenery is marked by several active and dormant volcanic cones.
The phrase is at worst only very mildly derogatory, and is usually only used humorously with no pejorative connotations.
The country records more than 14,000 earthquakes a year – but only about 150 are usually felt. Schoolchildren in the country regularly undertake earthquake drills.


== Recent earthquakesEdit ==
4 September 2010: This 7.1 magnitude earthquake struck what was then New Zealand's second largest city, Christchurch. damaging many buildings, but with no loss of life. This was mainly due to New Zealand's building standards, the epicentre being approximately 40 kilometres (25 mi) from the city, and the quake hitting at 4:35am.
22 February 2011: A 6.3 magnitude earthquake caused far more damage in Christchurch, including 181 deaths. This quake struck at about lunchtime and was centred closer at Lyttelton, and shallower than the prior quake, explaining the resultant destruction.
21 July 2013: A 6.5 magnitude earthquake struct in the Cook Strait near the town of Seddon and caused moderate damage in New Zealands capital, Wellington. It was preceded by a strong M5.7 foreshock.
16 August 2013: A 6.6 magnitude earthquake struck near Lake Grassmere in South Islands Marlborough Region. It quake added substantial more damage to the town of Seddon after the 6.5 Seddon earthquake one month prior and both are considered to be an earthquake doublet.


== In popular cultureEdit ==
The title "Shaky Isles" has been used at least twice as the title for songs referencing New Zealand - by Mike Harding in 1989 and Dave Dobbyn in 1991. There is also a New Zealand theatre company based in London called "The Shaky Isles Theatre Company", headed by Emma Deakin.


== See alsoEdit ==
Earthquakes in New Zealand


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
New Zealand, the Shaky Isles of volcanoes and earthquakes at DigitalJournal