Blackpool Pleasure Beach is an amusement park situated along the Fylde coast in Blackpool, Lancashire, England. The park was founded in 1896 and has been owned and operated by the Thompson family since its inception. It is the most visited tourist attraction in the United Kingdom, and one of the top twenty most-visited amusement parks in the world, with an estimate of 5.5 million visitors in 2007. In 2014 it was voted as the best theme park in the United Kingdom and the ninth best park in Europe by the Travelers' Choice Awards.
The park holds many records, including the largest number of roller coasters of any park in the United Kingdom with ten, of which five are wooden– the Grand National, Big Dipper, Nickelodeon Streak, Wild Mouse and Blue Flyer. Many of the roller coasters in the park are record breaking attractions. When it opened in 1994, the Big One was the tallest and fastest roller coaster in the world. It was also the steepest, with an incline angle of 65° and one of the longest, measuring 5,497 feet (1,675 m). Currently, the ride holds the record as the tallest roller coaster in the United Kingdom, standing at 213 ft (65 m), with a first drop of 205 ft (62 m).
The Pleasure Beach is one of the few parks left in the world to operate a traditional wooden Wild Mouse coaster. The ride was built entirely in house, post-World War II and is still in complete working order. The Grand National is one of only three Möbius Loop coasters in existence. It was also the first park in Europe to introduce a fully inverting steel coaster, Revolution and is the last remaining park in the world to operate a Steeplechase roller coaster. The park went on to launch Valhalla , which was designed by Sarner, a UK based theme park design company. At a cost of £15 million it is the most expensive dark ride in the world. The park also operates Europe's only Nickelodeon Land, the worlds only Wallace & Gromit ride and the oldest amusement park ride in Europe, Sir Hiram Maxims Captive Flying Machines which opened in August 1904. The latest record is taken by Infusion which is the world's first suspended looping coaster entirely over water. On 25 May 2015 the Red Arrows Skyforce, a Gerstlauer Sky Fly thrill ride was opened by the Red Arrows. Construction of the ride cost an estimated £2 million. It is the first ride of its kind in the United Kingdom.


== History of the Pleasure Beach ==


=== Early years (1896-1929) ===
Pleasure Beach was founded in 1896 by Alderman William George Bean after he failed in his attempt to become an advertising man on New York's Madison Avenue. He returned to the UK in 1897 and opened two separate amusement parks; one adjacent to Euston Road in Great Yarmouth and another in Blackpool, opposite the tram terminus. The Great Yarmouth amusement park consisted simply of a switchback bicycle railway called the Hotchkiss's Patented Railroad. Bean stayed in Great Yarmouth with his wife and their only daughter Lillian-Doris until the end of the century before moving to Blackpool full-time.
In 1903, Bean, along with businessman John Outhwaite, purchased 30 acres (120,000 m2) of land known as the "Watson Estate" which was used to expand the amusement park in Blackpool. Bean and Outhwaite aimed to create a park similar to Coney Island in the USA, that would make adults feel like children again and inspire gaiety of a primarily innocent character and took inspiration from a small manually operated fair ground found at London's Earls Court. The first major attraction to open at Pleasure Beach was the "Hiram Maxim Captive Flying Machine" in 1904. The next attraction, a water ride similar to a Mill Chute was opened in 1905 under the name "The River Caves of the World." The same year the name "Blackpool Pleasure Beach" was founded. Outhwaite died in 1911, leaving the initial business to Bean, however the Outhwaite family still owned shares of the park, and would occasionally have input into the park's growth. Over the next few years, the park developed, with frequent large scale investments including the Virginia Reel, Whip, Noah's Ark, Big Dipper and Dodgems. In the 1920s Bean invested in the "Casino Building" a grand Art-Deco building which remains to this day.
In 1923, land was reclaimed from the sea front. It was at this period that the park moved to its 44-acre (180,000 m2) current location above what became Watson Road, which was built under the Pleasure Beach in 1932.


=== The Thompson Family ===
Since 1929, the Pleasure Beach has been owned by the Thompson family. In 1928, Lillian-Doris married Leonard Thompson, an Oxford Natural Sciences graduate and businessman. After their marriage, Leonard and Doris moved to London, where Leonard worked at a Swedish Match Company. A year later, W.G Bean died suddenly from pneumonia. On hearing of Bean’s death, the Thompson’s returned to Blackpool to console Doris’s mother, whilst decisions about the future running of the Pleasure Beach were in discussion. Leonard, up until that point had not had any active involvement with the Pleasure Beach whatsoever, however Bean's will stated that upon his death his daughter would inherit the whole business. Doris confronted Leonard, asking him what he wanted to do. On a mutual agreement, Leonard Thompson took over the running of the Pleasure Beach and had full responsibility of all its affairs. He appointed Oscar Haworth as the Managing Director and George Palmer as Chairman.
The park came under full control of the Thompson family in 1931 after the remaining Outhwaite family sold their share of the park. During this time Joseph Emberton, an architect famous for his work in the amusement trade was brought in to redesign the architectural style of the Pleasure Beach rides, working on the Grand National roller coaster, Noah's Ark and the Casino building to name a few. Emberton continued to design for the Pleasure Beach up to his death in 1956, after which Jack Ratcliffe, who had been involved in the Festival of Britain, was brought in to continue the work. Ratcliffed worked for many years at the park and much of his work can be found on the park today. Leonard Thompson died in 1976, having run the Pleasure Beach for 47 years. Following Thompson's death, Doris Thompson was appointed chairman of the business. Their only son, Geoffrey Thompson became the new managing director.
William "Geoffrey" Thompson was born in Manchester in 1936. He had previously administered the New Era Laundries in London before returning to the Pleasure Beach as head of catering at the Casino Building. He married his wife, Barbara Thompson (née Foxcroft) in 1962 and shortly afterwards they had three children, Amanda, Nicholas and Fiona. After Leonard's death, Geoffrey and his mother steadily extended the Pleasure Beach business. His first move was hiring Keith Ingham to make extensive alterations to the Casino building which later became the "Wonderful World" building (since then the building has reverted to its original name). Under Thompson's reign, the Pleasure Beach business expanded quite dramatically. He bought two separate amusement parks Pleasureland Southport and Frontierland, Morecambe and invested into food-and-ride trade at the Pleasure Beach. He saw the opening of the Steeplechase, Avalanche, Revolution, Big One, Ice Blast: The Ride and Valhalla.
Like his father before him, Geoffrey was often regarded as the front man to the steady growth of amusement parks globally and was regularly involved in promoting tourism in the North West of England. He sat on almost all the relevant agencies, such as the English Tourist Board and the British Association of Leisure Parks, Piers and Attractions, and was awarded an OBE for his contribution to tourism. In 1986, Pleasure Beach became one of the first companies in the United Kingdom to register with the Government Profit Related Pay Unit. Under this scheme the company agreed that, where profits exceeded £1 million, 10 per cent would be distributed among the permanent staff according to their length of service. Despite his noble reputation as a leading businessman in the amusement park industry, Thompson often found himself in dispute with both Blackpool Council and Morecambe Town Council, who would regularly oppose his plans to develop the Morecambe amusement park. As a result of his frustration, Geoffrey Thompson closed Frontierland in 2000 indefinitely, which had operated since 1909. Many of the rides were either destroyed, sold or moved to Thompson's other parks. The same year, Thompson opened Valhalla at the Pleasure Beach, which to date is the company's biggest ever investment. Geoffrey Thompson died at Blackpool Pleasure Beach on 12 June 2004 of heart problems, while attending a party to celebrate his daughters wedding. Doris Thompson, OBE died nine days later, on 23 June, the date of her sons funeral.
After the death of her father and grandmother, Amanda Thompson, Geoffrey's eldest daughter and a senior director of the park for over 15 years took over the whole Pleasure Beach business. Nicholas Thompson became the Deputy managing director and Fiona Gilje (née Thompson), a fundamental architect became a company director. Amanda had previously rose to prominence as the founder and president of Stageworks Worldwide Productions, which produced numerous high profile shows at both the Pleasure Beach and across the world. . Like her father and grandmother, Amanda was awarded an OBE for her contribution to tourism. During Amanda's reign, the park has seen vast redevlopment, including the introduction of mass branding, as well as the removal of numerous rides including the Whip, Log Flume, Space Invader 2, Turtle Chase, Spin Doctor, Trauma Towers, Noah's Ark, Black Hole, Bling and Super Bowl. In 2005, the family decided to close Pleasureland Southport which had been losing the company money for several years. This move coincided with the introduction of Infusion, which would become the park's first new roller coaster in 13 years, having previously operated at Pleasureland Southport under the name of Traumatizer.
In 2011, the Thompson family signed a contract with the Nickelodeon brand to open Nickelodeon Land, a 12-acre theme park situated within the main park. This deal included a long term £5 million loan from Blackpool Borough Council, as well as £5 million investment from the company itself. In 2013, the park worked with Aardman Animations who introduced Wallace & Gromit's Thrill-o-Matic ride, and in 2015 the park teamed up with the RAF to open the Red Arrow's Skyforce a ride based on the famous air acrobatic team.


=== Managing directors ===


== Current Park ==
Pleasure Beach is situated on a 44-acre site along the South Promenade (Ocean Boulevard) area of Blackpool, approximately 2.4 square miles from Blackpool North Railway Station. It is bordered by the Promenade, Balmoral Road, Bond Street, Burlington Road West and Clifton Drive, while also positioned directly above Watson Road, which is underneath the grounds and runs under the centre of the park. A ticket office used to be located in the tunnel, but has now closed. The main Ticket Centre can be accessed through the Casino Building which is situated to the north of the park. Blackpool Pleasure Beach railway station and the Big Blue Hotel are towards the south end of the park.


=== Awards & Accolades ===
2007: Best brand for leisure and tourism – North West Top 100 Brands
2007: Pleasure Beach training team: Best Practice in Tourism Training – LETTS awards
2007: Fifth best amusement park in the world – Golden Ticket Awards
2007: Best seaside park award – Golden Ticket Awards
2007: Best radio commercial – IAAPA Brass Ring Awards
2007: Pleasure beach website – distinguished excellence – IAAPA Brass Ring Awards
2007: Valhalla: second best water ride in the world – Golden Ticket Awards
2007: Best North-West brand for leisure and tourism – Hill Dickinson 
2007: Revitalised Brand of the Year – Leisure Report Awards
2008: North-West Brand for Leisure and Tourism – Hill Dickinson
2008: Ripleys Believe It Or Not!: Franchise of the Year and Guest Service Award – Ripleys Executive Board
2009: Forbidden: Best Overall Production – IAAPA Big E Awards
2009: Hot Ice: Best Overall Production – IAAPA Big E Awards
2011: Top Ten Best Theme Parks – Golden Ticket Awards
2011: Big Blue Hotel - Loo of the Year Award
2013: Best Attraction for Groups- Lancashire Tourism Awards 
2014: Best Large Tourist Attraction – North West In Bloom
2014: Arena- Favourite Rink- LAMBCO 
2014: Second Best Seaside Park- Golden Ticket Awards 
2014: Valhalla: second best water ride in the world – Golden Ticket Awards
2014: Best Theme Park in the United Kingdom; 9th Best Theme Park in Europe - Travelers' Choice Awards
2014: Big Blue Hotel- Third best hotel in the United Kingdom- Travelers' Choice Awards 


=== Accidents ===
Avalanche: In the summer season 1997, the Avalanche ride was involved in an accident when the first carriage's braking system automatically engaged, causing the following carriages to collide into one another in a rapid stop. 14 people were on the ride at the time, an 11-year-old boy suffered bruised ribs. The ride was out of commission for 5 weeks of repairs.
Big Dipper: On 11 August 2009, two trains carrying a total of 32 guests collided, resulting in 21 guests requiring treatment at a nearby hospital for injuries ranging from whiplash and broken noses, to cuts and bruises.
Big One: In July 1994, only a week after the ride's opening, eight people were injured when the computer system failed to completely stop a train returning to the station. The result of this brake failure was a collision with a waiting train at the ride's station. The injuries were all only minor but the incident was widely publicised by the media. On 14 June 2011 the train stopped, causing minor injuries. One person was reported to be hospitalised with whiplash injury. On 31 August 2000, 23 people were injured, when two ride vehicles collided due to a failure of the ride's braking system. Of those injured, 21 were taken to the hospital.
Fun House: On 16 December 1991, the Fun House attraction (first opened in 1934) was completely destroyed by a fire caused by vandals. Valhalla (opened in 2000) was built in its place.
Grand National: On 20 May 2004 the Grand National’s station was destroyed by a fire that also damaged Alice’s Wonderland and Trauma Towers. The ride was repaired and re-opened five months later on 28 October 2004. In 2014, 58-year-old Robert Sycamore broke his neck whilst riding the Grand National. Sycamore, who suffered from spondylitis, an inflammation of the vertebrae in the back ignored safety warnings and rode the wooden roller coaster with his thirteen year old nephew. Upon returning to the station, Sycamore was found slumped in the carriage and was rushed to hospital, however as a result of the accident was left paralyzed.
Space Invader 2: On 21 July 2000, Christopher Sharrat, an 11-year-old boy died after falling out of a ride vehicle on the Space Invader roller coaster. Reports say that he may have panicked on the dark ride and unfastened his seatbelt. As a result of the accident, the ride was closed and carriages were re-fitted with over the head restraints. The ride opened after a short hiatus as Space Invader 2.


== Rides ==


=== Roller coasters ===


=== Thrill rides ===


=== Water rides ===


=== Family rides ===


=== Nickelodeon Land Rides ===


== Past Rides & Attractions ==


== Park Entertainment ==


=== Hot Ice ===
A seasonal show performed at the park's Ice Arena (previously the Ice Drome). The show has been running since 1936 and is produced by Amanda Thompson and choreographed by Oula Jaaskelainen.


=== Other shows ===
The Horseshoe Bar and The Globe Theatre are home to various magic and variety shows throughout the year, including Ken Webster Comedy Hypnotist. Webster's show at the Pleasure Beach is the longest running comedy hypnotism show in the world having played at the resort for over 25 years. Famous magician Richard De Vere performed magic shows at the park for 21 consecutive seasons, until his death in 2014.


== Ocean Boulevard ==
Ocean Boulevard is situated along the south promenade area of Blackpool. The quarter-mile strip is home to the Pleasure Beach and is intersected with Watson Road. A number of catering outlets, restaurants (including Pizza Hut), shops and the Big Blue Hotel are situated along the Boulevard.


=== Other Attractions ===
Haunted Crypt: A haunted house-type walkthrough attraction.
Pasaje Del Terror: Interactive horror maze, situated towards the north end of Ocean Boulevard, adjacent to the entrance to Pleasure Beach. Opened in 1996.
Starr Pub: A pub situated towards the south end of Ocean Boulevard, underneath the Big One's first drop. Closed in 2012 and briefly re-opened as the Apple and Parrot in 2014.
Coasters American Diner: A Mexian themed diner situated towards the south end of Ocean Boulevard. Closed in 2009 and relocated inside the park.
Education Academy: Situated next to Ripley's. A learning and training centre that housed many of the Pleasure Beach's archives and past artifacts. Closed in 2014 and currently used as storage.


=== The Big Blue Hotel ===
A family hotel with a four star AA rating, situated adjacent to Blackpool Pleasure Beach railway station towards the south end of Ocean Boulevard. Opened in Spring 2003.


== Television series ==
In 1997 the Pleasure Beach featured in a six-part BBC documentary, which followed the day-to-day running of the park. It was mainly focused on the rides and the park managers, Jim Rowland and Keith Allen. The film crews also spoke to Geoffrey Thompson and Amanda Thompson, the director and producer of Stageworks Worldwide Productions (which directs, produces and choreographs the shows within the park.)


== In popular culture ==
The Pepsi Max Big One is featured in the film The Parole Officer (29001) and in one episode of A Touch of Frost.
The music video for Simply Red's song "Fairground", The Killers' "Here With Me" and the 5 Seconds of Summer's Try Hard music video were shot here.
The Infusion rollercoaster featured in the 2009 Specsavers advertising campaign.
In 2002 Living TV's Most Haunted conducted an investigation at the Pleasure Beach.
The Laughing man was briefly portrayed as a psychotic French clown in Jamie H Scrutton's: "His Haunted Laughter" short film in 2010. The artist performed in the role of the character.
The park was included in the drama Waterloo Road. Finn Sharkey (Jack McMullen), Lauren Andrews (Darcy Isa), Sambuca Kelly (Holly Kenny) and Tom Clarkson (Jason Done) visit the park.
In 1988 the children's television programme Blue Peter visited the park. Presenters Mark Curry and Yvette Fielding rode the then newly launched Avalanche coaster and interviewed Doris and Geoffrey Thompson.
Professional Wrestler Darren Kenneth Matthews, most commonly known as William Regal began his wrestling career at the park at aged 15.
Parts of the Harry Hill Movie was filmed at Pleasure Beach.
An advertising campaign for Irn Bru featuring a group of goths riding the Revolution roller coaster (then sponsored by the brand) was filmed at the park.
British boy band JLS rode on the Big Dipper in early 2012, singing their hit "Everybody in Love" as they did so. Their ride was filmed and posted on line via their official Facebook page.
Kevin Bacon rode the Big One with a young child to advertise EE 4G The advertisement was then aired on national television in May 2014.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==
Pleasureland Southport
Frontierland, Morecambe
Minirail, a monorail at Expo 67 that shares track and rolling stock with Blackpool, both acquired from the 1964 Swiss National Exhibition.
Wallace & Gromit
Nickelodeon
Alton Towers


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Walton, John K. (2007). Riding on Rainbows: Blackpool Pleasure Beach and its Place in British Popular Culture. St. Albans: Skelter Publishing. ISBN 0-9544573-6-6. 


== External links ==
Official website