The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of 68 of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Ruby and Sapphire versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== Treecko ==
Treecko, known in Japan as Kimori (キモリ), is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise. Created by Ken Sugimori, Treecko first appeared in the video games Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire as the grass-type starter, then later in subsequent sequels. It appears in various merchandise, spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise.
Treeckos make nests in trees deep in the forest and are fiercely territorial. They're also able to walk on walls and ceilings due to numerous little spikes on the soles of their feet. They can sense humidity through their tails, and can use this ability to predict the weather. Shiny Treeckos are a pale blue with a red tail and tan belly, rather than the usual green and dark green with a red belly. It evolves through leveling up.


== Grovyle ==
Grovyle (ジュプトル, Juputoru, Juptile in original Japanese language versions) is the evolution of Treecko. The leaves that grow out of Grovyle's body, as well as its matching green coloration, provide excellent camouflage against the background of its native habitats, the forests and jungles of Hoenn. But even if spotted, Grovyle has little trouble escaping danger. Its powerful thigh muscles make it very adept at climbing trees and jumping from branch to branch very quickly, disappearing into the forest and eluding its pursuers. The shiny version is similar to Treecko's, with a pale blue body, tan belly, and red leaves as opposed to green, red, and dark green. Similar to the other starter evolutions, it evolves through leveling up.
In the anime, Ash Ketchum's Treecko evolves into Grovyle. Its personality does not change much; Grovyle is as much of a loner as Treecko was, and it loves the challenge of a battle. It also habitually keeps a twig in its mouth, although larger than the one it used to keep as a Treecko. When Ash returns to Kanto to take the Battle Frontier challenge, Grovyle is one of the Pokémon he takes with him. Ash continues to use Grovyle until its evolution into Sceptile.
IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that Grovyle outclasses the Pokémon Bayleef in speed but she still finds Bayleef "the better Pokemon overall".


== Sceptile ==
Sceptile (ジュカイン, Jukain) is the final evolution of Treecko. Sceptile's power is unmatched in the jungle, and they are thus the dominant species in such environments. Sceptile's bodies are configured for battling prowess and superior mobility in jungle environments, with large, sharp leaves protruding from their arms and legs that can easily cut large trees. As caretakers of the forest, these Pokémon carefully grow trees and plants with loving care. The orb-like seeds on a Sceptile's back are filled to the brim with nutrients, which Sceptile use to revitalize the trees in their care. Sceptile regulate their body temperature by basking in sunlight. Its signature move in Generation III is Leaf Blade. The shiny versions, have pale blue bodies, red seeds on their backs, and a yellow stripe rather than red. When it can Mega Evolves, it becomes a Grass/Dragon.
In the anime Battle Frontier saga, Ash's Grovyle evolves into a Sceptile during a battle with a Tropius. Even after evolution, Sceptile retains its rebellious personality. Ash's Sceptile is initially unable to use any attacks, due to the psychological impact of a Meganium's rejection. However, it regains the ability to use its attacks, and it later learns the SolarBeam attack.
IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that its evolution Sceptile was "much-beloved" but felt that the Pokémon Meganium "outclasses him in almost every way". She added that she "sincerely appreciate[s] the fact that there is at least one Ruby/Sapphire starter who is a pure type". 1UP.com's Michael Vreeland compared the Pokémon Servine to Sceptile due to both sharing the attack Leaf Blade.


== Torchic ==
Torchic, known in Japan as Achamo (アチャモ), is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise. Created by Ken Sugimori, it first appeared in the video games Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise. The name Torchic is a portmanteau of the words torch, a flame or light used to see in darkness, and chick, a common name for infant chickens. The Japanese name for Torchic, Achamo (アチャモ), is a portmanteau of aka (アカ), a term for baby, and shamo (シャモ ), a breed of Japanese bird, originally bred for fighting or hunting. The name Torchic refers to both the overall species, and to individual Torchic within the games, anime and manga series. Torchic, known as the Chick Pokémon, are small, clumsy birds with yellowish feathers and orange bodies. Torchic dislike darkness because it prevents them from seeing their surroundings, regardless of their proficiency with fire techniques which can illuminate the dark. Before Torchic's legs develop fully, they stay with their Pokémon trainer, following behind with unsteady, hopping steps while they learn to walk properly. They also have a sac filled with churning fire deep within their stomach, allowing them to give literal "warm hugs" to their trainers. This powerful fire also serves as their "ammunition" in battles; when attacked, they retaliate by spitting fire, at temperatures of over 1,800 degrees.
In the anime, May chooses a playful Torchic as her starter Pokémon because she considers it to be cute. She often uses it in battles, but avoids using it in Pokémon Contests until it evolves. It evolved into Combusken in A Shroomish Skirmish to protect Ash's Corphish. Combusken evolves into a Blaziken during the break of a Pokémon Contest when they were trying to stop Team Rocket from stealing Pikachu and other Pokémon. May then used Blaziken in the Battle Phase against Ash's Sceptile.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Sapphire received a Torchic (nicknamed Toro) from her father, Professor Birch. Toro evolved before a battle against Brawly along with Rono, her Aron. After several concussive battles against Team Aqua and gym leader Flannery, it evolved again to Blaziken in a bout against Winona. It is Sapphire's most trusted team member, and was used in almost every single major battle she had.
In Pocket Monsters Chamo-Chamo ★ Pretty ♪ manga, a sequel to Magical Pokémon Journey, Haruka also chooses Torchic as her starter Pokémon due to the Pokémon's cuteness. The Torchic later falls in love with Mightyena, and had a fight with Gardevoir gang during Valentine's Day. She believes that Combusken and Blaziken are ugly, and can't stand the thought of not being cute and adorable anymore, so she refuses to evolve.
In 2004, two Torchic design toys, the "Torchic Plush Keychain" and "Plush Bean Bag Torchic", were part of a major recall by Tomy of 13 plush Pokémon toys. Due to a manufacturing fault, tips of needles were left in the stuffing, causing makers to replace the toys with compensation or replacements. A Torchic-themed Game Boy Advance SP was released exclusively in Japan at the Japanese Pokémon Center. GameSpot's Greg Kasavin wrote that Torchic "fit in well with the tried-and-true classics like Pikachu, Psyduck, and Koffing". GameSpy's Gerald Villoria called Torchic a "fan-favorite". East called Torchic a "star veteran". IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote in another article that while she chose Mudkip, she "now join[s] the huddled masses in keening "why, oh why didn't I choose Torchic?!" Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Thomas East wrote that "it's hard to see that Blaziken evolved from Torchic".


== Combusken ==
Combusken (ワカシャモ, Wakashamo, Wakasyamo in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Torchic. Combusken's legs are both fast and powerful, and to keep them at peak physical condition, many run through nearby fields and mountains to stay agile and strong. By doing this, Combusken can kick up to 10 times per second, not giving up easily. Like Torchic, Combusken has a place within its body that stores and produces incredibly hot flames, It allows it to spew flames from its beak and to kick continuously until an opponent either faints or gives up.
In the anime, May owned a Combusken that evolved from her Torchic to protect Ash's Corphish, and it later evolved into a Blaziken.


== Blaziken ==

Blaziken, known in Japan as Bursyamo (バシャーモ), is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise. Created by Ken Sugimori, Blaziken first appeared in the video games Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spin-off titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise. Blaziken's signature move in Generation III was Blaze Kick. It can Mega Evolve in Pokémon X and Y and Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire.


== Mudkip ==

Mudkip, known in Japan as Mizugorou (ミズゴロウ'), is the Water-Type Starter Pokémon of the Hoenn region. Mudkip is a small amphibious Pokémon. It has a light blue body. It has a large head with a fin on top, and a light-blue tail fin. By using the fin on its head, Mudkip is able to detect changes in the air and water currents, as well as in bodies of water. Its fin is also able to point in multiple directions. Mudkip is capable of moving or crushing objects much larger than itself.


== Marshtomp ==
Marshtomp (ヌマクロー, Numakurō, Numacraw in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Mudkip. The surface of Marshtomp's body is enveloped by a thin, sticky film that enables it to live on land. Because it weakens if its skin dries out, it replenishes fluids by playing in mud. Its hindquarters exhibit development, giving it the ability to walk on just its hind legs. These legs are very strong, and give Marshtomp sure footing in muddy terrain. Like Mudkip, it can use the fin on its head to navigate.
In the Pokémon anime, Brock has a Marshtomp that evolved from a Mudkip he caught that is currently at his hometown in Pewter City.


== Swampert ==
Swampert (ラグラージ, Ragurāji, Laglarge in original Japanese language versions) is the final evolved form of Mudkip. It was introduced in generation III and can be obtained as a starter Pokémon in Ruby, Sapphire, and Emerald versions. It lives and makes its nest offshore on various beaches. It has various abilities that allow it to live without fear of being targeted as prey. It has powerful vision that can see through even the depths of murky water. Its three fins sense subtle changes in the sounds and patterns of ocean waves and tidal winds to predict the oncoming of storms and tidal waves, respectively. Its great strength, allowing it to procure and drag boulders that can weigh a ton, lets it pile up boulders around its beach nest in order to weather the storms that it may predict. With its strength and its rock-hard arms, it can easily batter down a foe with a single swing and pull ships while swimming faster than a personal water craft. Its signature move up to Generation III is Muddy Water. Swampert was given a Mega Evolution like the Other Hoenn starters from Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire.


== Poochyena ==
Poochyena (ポチエナ, Pochiena, Pochyena in original Japanese language versions) is a dark-colored, dog-like hyena species of Pokémon common in the Hoenn region. It is an omnivore, able to eat almost anything, and it will attempt to take a bite out of anything that moves when it first sees it. This Pokémon is both aggressive and cowardly; it chases after prey until the victim becomes exhausted, but if the prey strikes back, Poochyena may turn tail and run.
Poochyena and its evolution (Mightyena) hold the distinction of being the first pure-Dark type (as of Generation IV) that can evolve (as most of the Dark types don't evolve at all, and the ones that do evolve are only half-Dark types). Two new Pokémon for Generation V (Zorua and Zoroark) will also share this distinction.


== Mightyena ==
Mightyena (グラエナ, Guraena in original Japanese language versions) is the larger and stronger evolved form of Poochyena. It is a carnivore with characteristics of hyenas and wolves, and a monochrome appearance. Mightyena inhabit wide grasslands in the Pokémon world. They live and hunt in packs, and never defy the orders of a strong and experienced trainer. This unquestioning loyalty transfers over to when Mightyena are owned by Pokémon trainers, but the Mightyena will only obey the orders of a trainer it recognizes as possessing superior skill.
In the event that an individual Mightyena encounters a threatening foe, it gives obvious signals when it is preparing to attack; It starts to growl deeply and then flattens its body before biting savagely.


== Zigzagoon ==
Zigzagoon (ジグザグマ, Jiguzaguma, Ziguzaguma in original Japanese language versions) is a raccoon dog-like Pokémon and is one of the most common Pokémon species in the Hoenn region. It is based on a Japanese tanuki, which is a raccoon dog. Its distinctively jagged fur, evocative of zigzag patterns, is bristly enough for it to rub its back against the bark of trees to leave its territorial markings. It is a very curious species of Pokémon, investigating anything it happens to see, hence its tendency to restlessly wander everywhere in search of something (and in a generally zigzagging pattern as it is constantly distracted and deviates from its route).The "Zigzag" also occurs in its footprint. This Pokémon is not particularly powerful in the wild, so it may play dead to fool foes battling it.


== Linoone ==
Linoone (マッスグマ, Massuguma in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Zigzagoon. Its larger and longer appearance more closely resembles the Eurasian Badger, and its streamlined body structure allows it to run up to 60 miles per hour in a perfectly straight line. However, like Tauros, it is exceedingly difficult for it to negotiate a gently curving path, as it must stop completely before taking off in a different direction. This is in direct contrast with the freely wandering tendencies of its pre-evolution Zigzagoon.
Linoone preys on both land-dwelling and pond-dwelling wildlife. When hunting on land, it will charge toward its prey at top speed. When it spots potential prey underneath the surface of a pond, it quickly leaps in and catches it with its sharp claws.


== Wurmple ==
Wurmple (ケムッソ, Kemusso in original Japanese language versions) is a larval Pokémon common in both the Hoenn region and the Sinnoh region. It can be considered the modern counterpart to earlier larval Pokémon species Caterpie and Weedle. A common target for avian Pokémon such as Swellow and Staravia, the generally weak Wurmple attempts to defend itself with the spikes on its tail and head which secrete poison, and it can spit slimy thread to slow down opponents. Otherwise, Wurmple feeds by peeling the bark off trees and feeds on the oozing sap. Its feet are tipped with suction pads that allow it to cling to glass without slipping. A Wurmple can evolve into either a Cascoon or a Silcoon (Silcoon---Beautifly and Cascoon---Dustox) depending on its nature and gender but it is a random possibility for each Wurmple and cannot be changed.
In the Pokémon anime, recurring female trainers May and Jessie each catch a Wurmple, and their rivalry is reflected in the differing forms the Wurmple evolve into; May's Wurmple becomes a Silcoon that eventually evolves into a Beautifly, while Jessie's Wurmple becomes a Cascoon that eventually evolves into a Dustox.


== Silcoon ==
Silcoon (カラサリス, Karasarisu, Karasalis in original Japanese language versions) is a cocoon Pokémon form that Wurmple can take. It can be considered a modern counterpart to earlier cocoon Pokémon species Metapod and Kakuna, but it is definitely the physical counterpart to Cascoon, an alternative cocoon form that Wurmple can take instead at random. Silcoon is a semi-mobile ellipsoid ball of white silk where the eyes of the mutating Pokémon inside are visible looking out. It hangs on tree branches awaiting evolution into its Beautifly form, during which it conserves energy by moving as little as possible, feeding on rainwater that is collected by its silk outgrowths, and generally keeping a constant watch over its surroundings for threats.
In the Pokémon anime, trainer May's Wurmple evolves into the Silcoon stage and then the Beautifly stage shortly after, as opposed to Jessie's Wurmple becoming a Cascoon and then a Dustox.


== Beautifly ==
Beautifly (アゲハント, Agehanto, Agehunt in original Japanese language versions) is a butterfly Pokémon and one of two flying insect Pokémon forms that Wurmple can eventually take. It can be considered a modern counterpart to the earlier butterfly Pokémon species Butterfree, but it is definitely the physical counterpart to Dustox, the other form into which a Wurmple can eventually evolve. Beautifly is a very vain and colorful butterfly with a long, coiled, needle-like mouth not unlike the proboscis of a real butterfly, which it uses both for gathering pollen in the wild and, despite their gentle appearance, for aggressively attacking opponent Pokémon when angered. It is most active in the springtime, where it rides the spring winds as it flits around gathering pollen from flower-covered fields, or from potted flowers left on windowsills. Beautifly have an aggressive nature, stabbing their prey with their long narrow mouth to suck the preys fluids.
In the Pokémon anime, Beautifly becomes May's primary Pokémon for use in Pokémon contests early on, and Jessie's Dustox is established as its rival.
1UP.com named Beautifly the fourth "Lamest Pokémon" in the franchise, noting the similarity to Butterfree including evolutionary forms, with the only difference being the evolution dependent on the game's day and night cycle.


== Cascoon ==
Cascoon (マユルド, Mayurudo, Mayuld in original Japanese language versions) is a cocoon Pokémon form that Wurmple can take. It can be considered a modern counterpart to earlier cocoon Pokémon species Metapod and Kakuna, but it is definitely the physical counterpart to Silcoon, an alternative cocoon form that Wurmple can take instead at random. Cascoon is a semi-mobile ellipsoid ball of purple silk where the eyes of the mutating Pokémon inside are visible looking out. It hides away from predators in the wild using the more crafty method of covering its body with large, dead leaves. Its initially soft body hardens over time and begins to crack when it nears evolution into Dustox, and at this point it will do nothing in order to conserve its energy. It is known that if you hurt a Cascoon, when it becomes Dustox it will seek revenge.
In the Pokémon anime, trainer Jessie's Wurmple evolves into the Cascoon stage and then the Dustox stage shortly after, as opposed to May's Wurmple becoming a Silcoon and then a Beautifly. Jessie thinks that her Cascoon is a Silcoon, but it's a mistake and when it evolves, Jessie is somehow very happy.


== Dustox ==
Dustox (ドクケイル, Dokukeiru, Dokucale in original Japanese language versions) is a moth-like Pokémon and one of two flying insect Pokémon forms that Wurmple can eventually evolve into, the other being Beautifly. Dustox's green wings are coated with a fine and powerfully toxic dust which it uses to defend itself and deter bird Pokémon that might attack it. It feeds on leaves on trees it seeks out with its radar-like antennae, and it is instinctively attracted to bright light like many real moths. Swarms of Dustox can end up attracted to the bright lights of major cities at night, and end up causing unintentional havoc with the trees of those cities.
In the Pokémon anime, Dustox becomes Jessie's primary Pokémon for use in Pokémon contests early on, and is often treated as a rival to May's Beautifly. Jessie often tries to cheat with her Dustox, however, they still seem to always lose to May's Beautifly. Jessie later releases Dustox so it could be with its mate.


== Lotad ==
Lotad (ハスボー, Hasubō, Hassboh in original Japanese language versions) is both an aquatic and a land-dwelling Pokémon, found in the Hoenn region, with a lilypad growing on its back. This species lives in groups at ponds, with their bodies submerged while suspended at the surface by their buoyant leaves, as a measure of hiding from predators. When on dry land, Lotad scuttles towards other ponds because its leaf is too heavy to support, in contrast to Lotad's ancient ancestors which were one primarily land-dwelling Pokémon. Lotad and its evolved forms have mouths resembling duck bills, which may be a pun on the duckweed.
In the Pokémon anime, a Lotad becomes one of the Pokémon in trainer Brock's possession in the third-generation Hoenn story arc in a development considered ironic because previously Brock primarily used Pokémon of the Rock and Ground types. His Lotad eventually evolved into Lombre, and then Ludicolo.


== Lombre ==
Lombre (ハスブレロ, Hasuburero, Hasubrero in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Lotad. Lombre is a nocturnal Pokémon found in the Hoenn region, whose lilypad, carried over from its Lotad stage, is now attached to its head like a sombrero. Lombre's entire body is covered by a slippery, slimy film. It feels horribly unpleasant to be touched by this Pokémon's hands. It feeds on aquatic moss that grows in the riverbed. Besides sharing some physical traits of the kappa, it also shares the creature's penchant for mischief: When a Lombre spots anglers, it will tug on their fishing lines from beneath the surface and enjoy their consternation. It also takes great delight in popping out of rivers and startling people.
In the Pokémon anime, the Lotad in trainer Brock's possession during the third generation Hoenn story arc evolves into a Lombre over time, and later on into a Ludicolo. As a Lombre, Brock's is quirky and dense.


== Ludicolo ==
Ludicolo (ルンパッパ, Runpapa in original Japanese language versions) is the final evolved form of Lotad. Appearing as a bipedal platypus, the lilypad on Ludicolo's head is carried over from its previous stages of Pokémon evolution and resembles a sombrero hat. Additionally, its pancho-styled fur makes it resemble a pineapple. Ludicolo can derive much energy and vitality from cheerful and upbeat music. Upon hearing such music, for example during festivities or mountain hiking expeditions, Ludicolo is driven into the open and starts dancing rhythmically. The principle behind this phenomenon is that the melodious sound waves are supposed to stimulate Ludicolo's cells into making it more powerful.
In the Pokémon anime, Brock's Lombre - during the third-generation Hoenn story arc - evolves into a Ludicolo. Like many of the Ludicolo species, Brock's Ludicolo is very cheerful and is frequently seen dancing joyfully around.
In Pokémon Colosseum Miror B., a glamorous afro headed boss in the game, owns four Ludicolo and bases his entire battle strategy around their special effects with Rain Dance. He still keeps two in the second fight and in Pokémon XD: Gale of Darkness, he appears again often with Ludicolo and its previous form Lombre.
A GamesRadar editor called Ludicolo a "wacky Grass Pokémon".


== Seedot ==
Seedot (タネボー, Tanebō, Taneboh in original Japanese language versions), known as the Acorn Pokémon, is a small brown creature with a grey-colored 'cap' that greatly resembles an acorn, so much so that it can easily startle Pokémon looking for food on the forest floor. It can stick onto trees with the top of its cap, and has a beige colored, mask-like patterning on its face with two beige feet for moving about. Seedot polishes its body once a day using leaves. Seedot enjoy consuming water and nutrients from trees. The more water Seedot drinks, the glossier its body becomes. When it finishes eating, its body becomes so heavy that it drops to the ground with a thump.
Seedot appears in Pokémon Pinball: Ruby and Sapphire by hitting a particular switch on the Sapphire Field. Making three Seedot appear activates Travel Mode. It also appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness partnered with a Pidgey, making "Team Seedgey". Seedot first appeared in the anime in "Seeing is Believing". A trio of these Acorn Pokémon were in a sad mood and Professor Birch used his Pokémon knowledge to cheer them up. A colony of Seedot and Nuzleaf, that all live in a giant tree, appeared in "Leave it to Brocko!".


== Nuzleaf ==
Nuzleaf (コノハナ, Konohana in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Seedot. Nuzleaf is a forest-dwelling Pokémon that is skilled at climbing trees, though they occasionally venture out of the forest to startle people. They live in holes bored in large trees. Nuzleaf oftentimes are trouble makers and enjoy playing tricks on other Pokémon and humans. Its long and pointed nose is its weak point, and it loses power if the nose is gripped. For this reason, it dislikes having its long nose pinched. Nuzleaf will sometimes pull out the leaf on its head and make a flute with it. The sound of Nuzleaf's flute strikes fear and uncertainty in the hearts of people lost in a forest. This is a reference to Pan, the Greek god of the forest.


== Shiftry ==
Shiftry (ダーテング, Dātengu, Dirtengu in original Japanese language versions) is the final evolved form of Seedot. Shiftry's appearance is based on the Tengu of Japanese mythology, with a long nose, white hair, feet resembling Geta sandals, and large fan-like hands being elements based on how Tengu are commonly portrayed. It is a mysterious entity in the Pokémon world said to arrive by the chilly winds of Winter, and it is said to be a fearsome guardian of the deep forests it holds sway over from its homes on the tops of toweringly tall trees in dark forests. Its hand fans, which are larger on males than on females, are capable of whipping 100 mph (160 km/h) gusts of wind, and it possesses a degree of Extra-sensory perception, able to read its foe’s mind and take preemptive actions most other Pokémon would be unable to do in time.


== Taillow ==
Taillow (スバメ, Subame in original Japanese language versions) is a common bird Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. Its Japanese name comes from tsubame (swallow). It is a migratory bird that dislikes cold seasons. It migrates to other lands in search of warmth, flying over 180 miles (290 km) a day on some occasions. It will courageously stand their ground against foes, taking on Pokémon like Skarmory with an equal footing. This gutsy Pokémon will remain defiant even after a loss. This however is in stark contrast to when it becomes hungry; it cries loudly. As a result of its relative youth, it sometimes becomes lonely and cries at night. It feeds on Wurmple that live in forests.
In the Pokémon anime, main trainer Ash Ketchum caught one and used it throughout the third-generation story arc, during which it evolved into a Swellow.


== Swellow ==
Swellow (オオスバメ, Ōsubame, Ohsubame in original Japanese language versions) is the larger and stronger evolved form of the Taillow Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. It lives as a migratory bird of prey; it constantly flies towards warmer climates in a migratory fashion, and the moment it spots its prey, Swellow dives down at a steep angle and snatches the hapless victim tightly with its talons. It never misses its targets in this respect. Swellow is quite fastidious with its own body, especially its wings. When it is not cleaning its wings and tail feathers regularly, two Swellow are gathered together and unhesitantly take it upon themselves to clean each other’s wings. A Swellow's tail feathers indicate that the individual is healthy if the feathers are standing at attention. Though its name suggests it is based on a swallow, Swellow has many characteristics of a falcon.
In the Pokémon anime, main trainer Ash Ketchum owned a Taillow, which eventually evolved into a Swellow, and he kept battling with it prominently throughout his journey in Hoenn.
Retronauts criticized the series' use of redundant new Pokémon, commenting that Swellow was “the same as Pidgey.”


== Wingull ==
Wingull (キャモメ, Kyamome, Camome in original Japanese language versions) is a common seagull-like Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. A common annoyance to those surfing from place to place, it shows up on every water route. It has the habit of carrying prey and valuables in its beak, and has been known to hide them in all sorts of locations. Wingull rides the winds and flies as if it were skating across the sky.
In the games, Wingull is commonly found when surfing in the Hoenn and Sinnoh regions. In the anime, Mr. Briney's Wingull, Peeko, first appeared in On a Wingull and a Prayer. Since then, Wingull has had many cameo appearances.


== Pelipper ==
Pelipper (ペリッパー, Perippā) is the larger and stronger evolved form of the Wingull Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. This uniquely proportioned pelican is usually found by or over oceans or other large bodies of water. It builds its nest on high cliffs facing the sea, and is able to rest on top of waves to regain energy. Pelipper skims the tops of waves while it hunts for its prey, which are typically fish Pokémon. When Pelipper spots its prey, it dips its large beak into the water and scoops it up. It then proceeds to swallow it whole. Pelipper also carries the eggs of its Wingull offspring inside its beak before and after they hatch. This provides the offspring with protection and, after they hatch, nourishment from the hunted food.


== Ralts ==
Ralts (ラルトス, Rarutosu) is a basic Pokémon found in the Hoenn region. Its red eyes are often obscured by its green hair, and its body is somewhat like a white dress. It very rarely appears before humans, and when it does, the person's emotions are a key factor in deciding whether it will come closer or run away. Its ability to sense emotions, or empathy, is linked to the horns on its head, and Ralts tends to mirror the emotions of its trainer. Its method of getting around is hopping on its legs or using its psychic abilities to teleport to its desired location.
In the Pokémon anime, Max befriends a Ralts, and promised to take it on adventures with him once he becomes old enough to be a Pokémon Trainer.
Fans of the series occasionally describe Ralts as "an apology for Abra," referring to the fact that it has similar abilities but is much less frustrating to catch.


== Kirlia ==
Kirlia (キルリア, Kiruria) is the larger and more developed evolved form of the Ralts Pokémon species, introduced in the third generation of Pokémon media in the fictional Hoenn region. Its appearance and mannerisms are evocative of a ballet dancer. Kirlia's brain is very highly developed, and Kirlia can employ psychokinetic powers which are amplified by the red horns on its head. When Kirlia uses its power, the air around it becomes distorted, creating mirages of nonexistent scenery. Kirlia's appearance and mood are heavily determined by the mood of its trainer. If the trainer is cheerful and happy, Kirlia will also be happy, and will spin and dance. The happier the trainer is, the more beautiful Kirlia will become. Likewise, a heartless trainer will result in a weak and saddened Kirlia, and its powers will have decreased significantly.


== Gardevoir ==
Gardevoir (サーナイト, Sānaito, Sirnight in original Japanese language versions) is a Psychic and Fairy type that evolves from Kirlia. It is known as the embrace Pokémon, and has an unparalleled sense of concern for its Pokémon trainer. Its name comes from a combination of two French words, Garde ('guard') and voir ('see'). It has the ability to read the future; and if it senses danger to its trainer, it unleashes its psychic energy. Its powers also peak during this phase. Using this power, it is capable of distorting dimensions, and eventually creating a small black hole. It may sacrifice its own life for the one of its trainer, whom it has closely bonded with. It also apparently does not feel the pull of gravity, as with its power it is able to support itself. Despite its feminine features, there are both male and female Gardevoir.
First appearing in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire as the evolution of Kirlia, Gardevoir is one of Ralts' final two evolutions alongside Gallade, the latter of which debuted in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl and only comes about when a male Kirlia is exposed to a Dawn Stone. Along with Jigglypuff and Marill, Gardevoir was among a number of Pokémon to gain the new Fairy type in the sixth generation of Pokémon. Gardevoir also appears as a major character in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team and can be released from a Poké Ball item in Super Smash Bros. Brawl and for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, where it will use Reflect to protect the player who released it. Gardevoir also appears as a playable fighter in Pokkén Tournament.
A Gardevoir appeared in the Pokémon episode, Do I Hear a Ralts? as a parent of a Ralts, one of the species on Gardevoir's evolutionary line. Additionally, in Mutiny in the Bounty!, a Gardevoir belonging to Pokémon trainer Melodi was stolen, but the psychic connection was too strong. Gardevoir's most recent appearance was in X and Y, under the strong ownership of Kalos Pokémon League champion Diantha. The strong bond between Diantha and Gardevior resulted in a powerful Mega Evolution bond, along with a Key Stone and a Mega Stone,the Mega Stone called Gardeviorite. When Team Rocket tried to snatch Gardevior away because of its attack power and strength, Diantha followed them because of the powerful bond. Later, when Gardevoir was unable to get out of the laser cage around it, Diantha said, All right Gardevoir, let`s show them something about a strong bond!", Gardevoir then Mega Evolved into Mega Gardevoir. Then Gardevoir resumed to its real form, due to Mega Evolution not being permanent, unlike real evolution.
IGN's PokemonOfTheDayHunk called Gardevoir a "really good Pokémon"; especially when compared to other Psychic-types like Azelf and Cresselia. They also said that it is "quite beautiful". IGN's Pokémon Chick also called it "so darn popular". GamesRadar described Gardevoir and Granbull as the equivalent of Beauty and the Beast. ScrewAttack listed Gardevoir 7th on their top 10 favourite Pokémon. However, they also called Gardevoir, along with Blaziken and Mightyena, "nothing too special".


== Surskit ==
Surskit (アメタマ, Ametama in original Japanese language versions) is a bug-like species of Pokémon based on the water strider insect. It was introduced in the third generation of Pokémon media in the fictional Hoenn region. Surskit frequents lakes and ponds, and it has the ability to walk, or at least glide, on the water's surface thanks to an oily substance secreted from the tips of its feet which modifies the water's surface tension, thus allowing the water to support its weight. Surskit's diet consists of the microscopic organisms that are found at the base of a lake ecosystem's food chain. Surskit can also secrete a thick, sweet syrup resembling honey from the tip of its head. This sap is said to appeal to some species of Pokémon such as Heracross. Surskit usually secretes the syrup when it finds itself in danger. The exact reasoning behind this is unclear, but it may aim at attracting Pokémon which will drive the danger away to lick the syrup off Surskit's head. The character's name is confusing to Swedes as it means "ill-tempered shit" in Swedish.


== Masquerain ==
Masquerain (アメモース, Amemōsu, Amemoth in original Japanese language versions) is an insectoid species of Pokémon that is the larger and more developed evolved form that a Surskit can metamorphosize into. Masquerain's appearance is configured to resemble to a degree a large, scary face, with its two giant orange antennae resembling eyes and its red face and two black eyes resembling a red mouth with two black teeth. This serves as an intimidation tactic to ward off potential predators. The four parallelogram-shaped appendages on its bottom are its real wings, and their fast flapping motions give Masquerain the ability to fly forwards, sideways, and backwards like a helicopter. Masquerain cannot fly in rain, so it therefore shelters itself under large trees and leaves.


== Shroomish ==
Shroomish (キノココ, Kinokoko, Kinococo in original Japanese language versions) is a mushroom-like Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. Shroomish are small green and peach colored Pokémon with a clear inspiration from mushrooms. They are peach on the upper half, where they are spotted with green and have a small opening at the top. This section ends with frilled segments, which overlap its green underside, which is round and has small, round feet. Shroomish seem to have a near permanent frown on their face.
Shroomish has a buildup of poisonous powders inside, which it can release when threatened. Some Shroomish also heal when poisoned. Shroomish is said to be mild tempered, and are often found keeping still under fallen leaves. If Shroomish senses danger, it shakes its body and scatters toxic spores from the top of its head. Shroomish eat naturally decayed plants, leaves, and other compost found on the forest floor. However, they are sometimes found in possession of a Kebia Berry.


== Breloom ==
Breloom (キノガッサ, Kinogassa in original Japanese language versions) is the larger and more developed evolved form that a Shroomish can metamorph into. This diurnal herbivore that lives in fields and forests with leaves for Breloom to feed on. Its favorite climate conditions are sunlight-induced warmth and humidity, which is when Breloom is at its most active. Breloom’s body is configured for battling opponents in a competitive boxing fashion. Its stretchable arms are capable of extremely quick, rapid-fire punches that are virtually invisible, putting professional human boxers to shame (compare with Hitmonchan).
Spores are located within Breloom’s toadstool cap, and Breloom sprays and scatters these spores out of the red holes on its cap as its tool to debilitate and poison opponents. Also toxically sporous are the seeds on Breloom’s tail, which sometimes drop off and are grown back. These seeds let loose their sporous contents when Breloom thwacks an opponent with its tail, making the foe even more at risk of succumbing to poisoning. These seeds are horrid things to consume; a mere bite out of one of these seeds that may be lying around on the forest floor will cause the consumer’s stomach to rumble.
Breloom is notable as one of three final-form Pokémon to receive the attack Spore, a sleep-inducing move with an accuracy of 100.


== Slakoth ==
Slakoth (ナマケロ, Namakero in original Japanese language versions) is a sloth-like Pokémon species found in the Hoenn region. Like what its name and anatomy suggest, Slakoth is extremely lazy, and its daily routine is extremely uneventful, and since it uses and requires so little energy, it sustains itself on three leaves a day and its heart beats once per minute. Slakoth is one of the most proficient sleepers in the Pokémon world, sleeping 20 hours a day (compare with Abra), and it is clearly not worried about possible predators in the area. Onlookers get sleepy themselves when looking at a Slakoth, in fact. Once in a great while, though, Slakoth can summon a surprising amount of energy and effort to travel great distances by swimming along rivers.


== Vigoroth ==
Vigoroth (ヤルキモノ, Yarukimono in original Japanese language versions) is the larger and more developed evolved form of a Slakoth. In sharp contrast to its previous form, the monkey-like sloth Vigoroth is in a constant state of unrest and activity. They have been known to be used as laborers by humans, possibly due to their energetic temperament and their constant need to be engaged in activity. This is usually manual labor because most Vigoroth are too impatient to work with technology such as computers. Appropriately, Vigoroth have the ability Vital Spirit, which prevents the condition of sleep.


== Slaking ==
Slaking (ケッキング, Kekkingu, Kekking in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of Vigoroth. Compared to its earlier, pre-evolved forms, the Slaking species features an anatomy much closer to that of a gorilla. Though extremely lazy, a Slaking's body contains a great amount of pent-up energy, and if it must battle an opponent it can potentially exert devastating power. In fields where these Pokémon have been, large bare patches appear in the grass. This is from where it reaches out and pulls up and eats all of the grass in its vicinity. When it has all been eaten, it reluctantly moves to another spot. Slaking is more powerful than most other non-legendary Pokémon, but it is held back by its ability, Truant, which forces it to loaf around every other turn, and almost every move that alters abilities does not work on Truant.


== Nincada ==
Nincada (ツチニン, Tsuchinin, Tutinin in original Japanese language versions) is an insectoid species of Pokémon found in the Hoenn region. It burrows underground and lives for years by feeding on tree roots, hiding motionlessly under the soil. Using its whiskerlike antennae, it feels its way to tree roots, which it slices open with its claws to feed. As a burrower, it's nearly blind until it evolves, and it does not even like being exposed to light.
Much like the cicada, it metamorphoses into a flying adult form through Pokémon evolution called Ninjask, and it leaves a distinctive husk behind. Unlike the mundane cicada's husk, however, Nincada's husk itself becomes a separate, sentient Pokémon species known as Shedinja. This is the only instance in Pokémon media where an individual Pokémon's evolutionary process results in the creation of two individual Pokémon, and in the Pokémon RPGs when a Pokémon trainer-owned Nincada evolves into a Ninjask, a Shedinja will appear in an empty slot in the trainer's Pokémon inventory.


== Ninjask ==
Ninjask (テッカニン, Tekkanin in original Japanese language versions) is a bug-type Pokémon that is the larger and stronger evolved form of Nincada. This cicada-like species is extremely fast. It constantly darts around, moving so fast that it is difficult to detect it. However, its distinctive cry is all too well heard, which led people in the Pokémon world to consider Ninjask invisible in the past. Ninjask loves to feed on tree sap. Ninjask is a difficult Pokémon to train, not only because it is hard to keep track of its location but also due to its demanding personality. Ninjask needs a competent trainer, and if it finds itself in the hands of an inexperienced person it will refuse to obey and instead cry continuously. Ninjask is the fastest non-legendary Pokémon and second fastest overall. Deoxys Speed Forme is first and Deoxys Attack Forme and Normal Forme follow to tie for third. This combined with the ability Speed Boost, which raises its speed every turn, makes Ninjask a useful choice in speed-based strategies.


== Shedinja ==
Shedinja (ヌケニン, Nukenin in original Japanese language versions) is literally the shed exoskeleton of a newly evolved Nincada into a Ninjask that has taken on a ghostly transformation of its own. Their hard-layered bodies are hollow and utterly dark, and they do not possess organs. There is a circular dark hole in its back which the Ninjask would theoretically climb out of after its evolution, and an old legend states that a Shedinja will steal the souls of anyone who looks into the opening on its back. Like shed exoskeletons, Shedinja are completely immobile and do not breathe. They are able to float and hover, however, though its wings do not move. They also have a halo-like object above their heads, suggesting the iconography of death, as Shedinja is technically undead. Although Shedinja is undead, it can still breed with a Ditto and produce a Nincada.
In the Pokémon games, Shedinja can not be found in the wild, but is obtained if the player leaves an open space in his/her party and have a Nincada evolve. Shedinja will then be located in that empty space. In Generation 3, it occupies a copy of the Poké Ball that Nincada was caught with. However, this was removed in later games, with Shedinja instead occupying a Poké Ball. Shedinja only has one hit point, no matter how high its level is. To compensate, it has a unique ability known as Wonder Guard. Because of this ability, Shedinja can only be damaged by the attack types which deal super-effective damage to it, namely, Fire, Flying, Rock, Ghost, and Dark type attacks. Weather effects such as hail or sandstorm will harm Shedinja, as well as health-draining moves such as Leech Seed. In addition, Shedinja takes damage from Stealth Rock (an entry hazard that can be set up by an opponent's Pokémon) upon switching in. Stat changing moves do not necessarily harm Shedinja; however, moves like Stun Spore, Thunder Wave, Poison Gas, etc. will have the corresponding effect on it.
It is debatable whether Shedinja can be seen as an evolution of Nincada or not. Technically, Shedinja is a part of the evolved Pokémon, not the evolved Pokémon itself, but it could also be argued that Nincada splits into two separate Pokémon upon evolution. Nintendo's official Pokédex on pokemon.com defines both Ninjask and Shedinja as evolved forms of Nincada.
A GamesRadar editor enjoyed Shedinja but felt that it was not very useful in battle. Another editor disagreed and felt that it was "surprisingly useful".


== Whismur ==
Whismur (ゴニョニョ, Gonyonyo in original Japanese language versions) is a basic species of Pokémon found in the Hoenn region. Whismur is a very timid Pokémon who dwells in caves. Its most defining characteristic is its voice. Normally, a Whismur makes very little noise, murmuring at a barely audible volume. However, if it senses danger, a Whismur will start crying in a voice loud enough to rival that of a jet plane. Once Whismur starts crying, it will go on for some time, even if the danger goes away, until they tire themselves out and fall asleep. It does not pause to catch its breath, since it breathes in through its ear canals (a technique reminiscent of circular breathing). Therefore, if its ear covers are shut, Whismur will stop crying. Otherwise, it will continue until it cries itself to sleep.


== Loudred ==
Loudred (ドゴーム, Dogōmu, Dogohmu in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon species that is the larger and stronger form that the Whismur species takes when going through Pokémon evolution. A Loudred builds power by stamping the ground while shouting. After Loudred finishes shouting, it becomes incapable of hearing anything for a while, which is considered a weak point. Loudred's bellowing can decimate a wood-frame house and its subsequent shockwaves can turn over a truck. It only needs to use its voice to punish its foes. Its round ears serve as loudspeakers, and they are positioned to assail foes with ultrasonic waves at massive volume. Loudred are also immune to Jigglypuff's and Wigglytuff's song due to its ability, Soundproof, which blocks all sound-related attacks like Supersonic,Sing,etc.


== Exploud ==
Exploud (バクオング, Bakuongu, Bakuong in original Japanese language versions) is the final evolved form of the Whismur evolutionary line. This large, imposing purple creature has a body and vocal cords that are specifically constructed to emit noises and sounds of any decibel level, high or low. The holes seen all over its body actually serve a dual-purpose; they can violently inhale air, signifying that Exploud is about to let loose a huge bellow loud enough to be heard from 6 miles (10 km) away and strong enough to trigger earthquakes. Exploud employs this as its offensive measure against opponents in battle. The holes themselves can emit sounds as well. The sound-generating organs hidden at the base of each tubular hole can be adjusted by Exploud for tone and volume, and whenever Exploud lets loose a bellow, the noise is amplified by these organs. When communicating with other Pokémon such as other Exploud, it emits slighter whistle-like sounds from its sound tubes instead of its normal voice.


== Makuhita ==
Makuhita (マクノシタ, Makunoshita in original Japanese language versions), known as the Guts Pokémon, are medium-sized yellow Pokémon that are known for their bulkiness. They have a black chest area and have hands that resemble black gloves. They also have red circles on their cheeks and slit-like eyes. It has a knot on its head possibly making it resemble a punching bag. Makuhita is a tenacious Pokémon, and will keep getting up and attacking its foe however many times it is knocked down. Makuhita packs its body with energy with its lifestyle, eating a lot of food, getting plenty of sleep, and training very rigorously. It loves to toughen up its body, and often trains in caves, or in forests, slamming into trees.
In Pokémon Pinball: Ruby and Sapphire, Makuhita sit to the right of the Ruby Field. Hitting the button in front of it changes it stance and allows control of Makuhita's punching with the A button. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon, Makuhita runs the dojo in Pokémon Square. In the anime, Makuhita first appeared in Brave the Wave as one of Brawly's Pokémon. During the Gym Battle, Makuhita evolved into a Hariyama.


== Hariyama ==
Hariyama (ハリテヤマ, Hariteyama in original Japanese language versions) is the larger and stronger evolved form of the Makuhita species. Hariyama appears like a sumo wrestler; its hands are large and orange, and it wears blue trousers with a yellow tare - one of kendo bogu. Hariyama trains by stomping on the ground to build power. Its powerful arm thrusts can snap a telephone pole in two and send two-ton trucks airborne. Although it appears fat, its bulk is made up almost entirely of muscle. If Hariyama were to tighten these muscles, it would be as hard as a rock. It has been known to challenge people to contests of strength without any hesitation. It has also been known to test its strength by standing on railroad tracks and using its arm thrusts to stop oncoming trains.


== Azurill ==
Azurill (ルリリ, Ruriri in original Japanese language versions), a species of Pokémon introduced shortly before the official start of the third generation of the Pokémon franchise as a "preview Pokémon", is the younger pre-evolved form of the Marill species introduced in the second generation. Its circular tail is large and rubbery, and Azurill's playful nature causes it to often be seen bouncing and playing on its bouncy tail. The tail is vital both for survival in peacetime and self-defense in battle; It is packed full with nutrients that supply itself to Azurill's body in order for it to grow. It is also a floatation device in water, much like the tails of its evolutions Marill and Azumarill. Its tail is about 1.3x as large as its body. Azurill's most intriguing habit with its tail involves spinning its tail as if it were a lasso, then hurling it out with intense force. The momentum of the throw sends its body flying, too. Using this unique mode of travel, one individual Azurill was seen to hurl itself a record 33 feet (10 m).
In the Pokémon RPGs, Azurill can only be acquired by hatching an egg produced by Marill holding the Sea Incense item. In the Pokémon anime, trainer Misty owns one after her previous "baby" Pokémon, Togepi, evolved into Togetic and departed. This Azurill is the offspring of Tracey's Marill. It is shown to have a sweet and caring nature and loves to play with the other Pokémon.


== Nosepass ==


== Skitty ==
Skitty (エネコ, Eneko, Eneco in original Japanese language versions), known as the Kitten Pokémon, is a pink feline Pokémon with a big head and a tail that resembles a pincushion with three pins in it. It loves to chase moving objects, and will sometimes become dizzy chasing its own tail. Although this adorable Pokémon is a very popular pet, it can be found living in the holes of trees in the forest. In battle, it makes its tail puff out, and threatens foes with a sharp growl. It is said to be difficult to earn its trust.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team, Skitty is one of the sixteen available starter Pokémon. Skitty is also playable in the game's sequel and is one of three normal types. In Pokémon Ranger, Teresa, a resident of Fall City, owns six Skitty. When they all run away during the second numbered mission, she gets the player to retrieve them for her. In the anime, May captures a Skitty that had been roaming the desert. After a battle against Jessie, she keeps the Skitty and uses it for Contests. May's Skitty has a knack for coming out of its Poké Ball at inappropriate moments, similar to Misty's Psyduck. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Ruby owns a Skitty named "Coco", which he uses in Pokémon Contests. It evolved into Delcatty after touching Steven's Moon Stone.


== Delcatty ==
Delcatty (エネコロロ, Enekororo in original Japanese language versions) is a highly laid back, unconcerned species of Pokémon. Its name is derived from the word, "delicate". It prefers to live completely free of priorities, doing only what it pleases at its own pace. Since these include eating and sleeping, its daily routine is completely random. However, its activities are generally more nocturnal than not. Delcatty does not stake a claim on a personal lair like other more territorial species of Pokémon. Rather, it makes it a habit to wander about and seek out more comfortable spots when it decides it’s time to sleep. Even here it is not defensive; if another Pokémon approaches its spot, Delcatty will take off for another place rather than fight. Domesticated Delcatty are highly regarded by fashion-trendy female trainers who often use the Pokémon in competitions revolving around its style and fur.


== Sableye ==
Sableye (ヤミラミ, Yamirami in original Japanese language versions) lives in deep underground caves, where it leads a quiet life. It is a lithovore, meaning that its diet consists of rocks and minerals, which it uncovers from the ground using its sharp claws. When its body becomes saturated with substances derived from the rocks it eats, those substances crystallize and rise to the surface of its body, giving it a gem-studded appearance. Despite its hermetic lifestyle, Sableye is a cause of fear for many thanks to its eyes, which glitter eerily in the darkness of the caves it inhabits. In the Pokémon world, it is thought that a Sableye can steal a person's soul through the glimmer in its jeweled eyes. It seems to be based on the Hopkinsville aliens, as it shares many characteristics with them, such as their shining eyes.
Sableye once held the distinction of being one of two dual-typed Pokémon who has no type that's super effective against either types under normal circumstances (the only way to circumvent this is through the moves Odor Sleuth, Foresight, or the ability Scrappy). The other Pokémon is the similarly typed Spiritomb (who is a Ghost type first and a Dark type second). However, with the recent introduction of the Fairy Type, it now has a weakness in normal circumstances (Fairy-Type moves are very powerful against Dragon Type, Fighting Type and Dark Type Pokémon: they also do average damage to Ghost Types).
Sableye is capable of Mega Evolution in Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire. When it Mega Evolves, its eyes turn red and gains a jewel-like shield.


== Mawile ==
Mawile (クチート, Kuchīto, Kucheat in original Japanese language versions) appears to be a small, timid creature, but it is a deceptive Pokémon. It is found in various caves throughout Hoenn, and on the Iron Island of Sinnoh. It lures opponents into feeling safe and secure with its docile face and its harmless gestures. After doing so, it attacks with a set of flexible steel horns that can easily penetrate iron. These horns act as a large set of jaws that bite foes, clamping them with the thick steel and puncturing them with its sharp "teeth". Not only can it bite opponents, but it can grab and throw them very long distances. Its design was based on a Japanese legend about a woman with a mouth on the back of her head called a Futakuchi-onna. In X and Y, Mawile is now part Fairy-type and one of several Pokémon capable of the Mega Evolution.
Mawile first appears in the anime in the episode "Once in a Mawile" where one has a crush on Brock's Lombre, but Lombre does not feel any affection in return. After Lombre evolves into a Ludicolo, it finally returns the affections, but Mawile does not feel attracted to the newly evolved Ludicolo.


== Aron ==
Aron (ココドラ, Kokodora, Cokodora in original Japanese language versions) has a body of steel. Aron eats iron ore that it digs from mountains, and uses the nutrients to sustain its steel body. It usually lives in colonies very deep below the mountain, usually about a mile down. If iron ore becomes unavailable, the colony moves to another place to search for solid iron objects to eat, including steel bridges and railroad tracks. Because of this, Aron colonies are largely considered a pest to society. Manufacturers, however, can consider Aron a blessing. When Aron evolves, it sheds its old iron casing. This iron is very tough, and is used by humans to make iron products. Arons also possess superior strength, despite their exceedingly small stature. With one all-out charge, this Pokémon can level a dump truck.
In the Pokémon Adventures Manga, Sapphire owns an Aron, named Rono, which was first seen battling a Pelipper at Rustboro City, and helped Sapphire rescue Mr. Stone's Castform. He evolved into Lairon after undergoing intensive training in Granite Cave, and battling Brawly's Makuhita.


== Lairon ==
Lairon (コドラ, Kodora in original Japanese language versions), known as the Iron Armor Pokémon, bears a striking resemblance to Rhyhorn. It has a Steel armor spine with black spots running along its back. Lairon are known to show off their strength when they bash into rocks, the sparks that are released seemingly show their strength. When two Lairon meet each other they will fight for territory by also bashing into each other. Lairon live in caves that are rich in iron ore. Lairon usually eat rocks that contain iron, and drink mineral water.
Lairon's first appearance was in A Fan with a Plan and Cruisin for a Losin. It was owned by a Pokémon Coordinator and used in a Pokémon Contest against May's Bulbasaur. Lairon's latest appearance is under the ownership of Paul, battling against Brandon's Regice.
In the Pokémon Adventures Manga, Sapphire owns a Lairon, named Rono, which evolved from Aron after undergoing intensive training in Granite Cave, and evolved when battling Brawly's Makuhita. Rono evolved into an Aggron during training on Mirage Island, with Juan, Tate, and Liza.


== Aggron ==
Aggron (ボスゴドラ, Bosugodora, Bossgodora in original Japanese language versions) is the third and final evolutionary form of Aron. Fiercely territorial, Aggron will claim a mountain as its territory and will attack any and all trespassers. Unlike its previous forms, Aggron is bipedal. However, it retains Aron and Lairon's dinosaurian basis, with Aggron in particular appearing as a bipedial triceratops. It also retains their iron-exclusive diet, which it satiates by finding iron by digging through bedrock with its steel horns. In Pokémon X and Y, Aggron is among the few Pokémon capable of Mega Evolution, which sees it lose its Rock typing and gain the Filter ability, which further reinforces its impressive defenses.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Sapphire owns an Aggron, named Rono, which evolved during training on Mirage Island, with Juan, Tate and Liza. In the Emerald arc, he fought against Tucker's Salamence.


== Meditite ==
Meditite (アサナン, Asanan in original Japanese language versions) resembles a person meditating, sitting with knees bent and feet together with its hands resting on its knees. Its lower body is blue, with white on the wrists, feet, and what seems to be pants, or possibly a diaper. Its head is also white, with an onion-like shape and large ears. Its eyes are large and focused. A male Meditite's ears are higher up on its head than a female's. Its meditation gives it inner strength and spiritual power. It also is able to endure long periods without eating, often only eating a berry a day. By enduring hunger, a Meditite's spirit is tempered and made sharper, so much so that it possesses the ability to fly.

Maylene, the Gym Leader of Veilstone City, owns a Meditite.


== Medicham ==
Medicham (チャーレム, Chāremu, Charem in original Japanese language versions) resembles a yoga practitioner, with a gray body and fat, red and yellow legs that resemble the pants of a belly dancer or a genie. It wears a sort of headpiece that is also red with three yellow spots in the center. Its large focused eyes are slightly covered by the headpiece, and its red lips seem to be puckered. The growth on top of Medicham's head is shorter on a female than on a male. Much like its pre-evolved form, Medicham are known for its daily meditation and is extremely spiritually focused because of it. Unlike Meditite, Medicham has developed psychic powers from meditating and is adept at reading people's minds. In battle, a Medicham uses elegant, dance-like movement to distract its enemy before attacking, as it possesses amazing agility.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team Medicham is the sole female member of the mischievous yet leaf turned team Team Meanies. Like the other Pokémon, Medicham is tired of Team Skull winning the yearly bowling trophy however she won't play after an incident where Gengar accidentally dropped his ball on her foot and won't trust him with a ball again.


== Electrike ==
Electrike (ラクライ, Rakurai), known as the Lightning Pokémon, are small, green, dog-like Pokémon with yellow markings. The electricity found in Electrike's body is obtained from the friction that occurs when it runs at incredible speeds. It is stored in its fur, and can be released at the Pokémon's will. It is affected by weather, letting out sparks whenever a storm approaches. Its body will also blaze with showers of sparks in seasons of especially arid air.
Electrike first appeared in the anime in Watt's with Wattson?. After Wattson was easily defeated by Ash Ketchum during the Gym Match, Wattson needed some time alone. During this, an Electrike came to comfort the Mauville City Gym Leader. Wattson decided to keep the electrical canine as one of his own Pokémon. Electrike also appeared in The Electrike Company! under the ownership of Jaco. Though Jaco thought that Electrike wasn't that strong and wouldn't pass a test, Ash and friends helped Electrike control its power, resulting in it evolving into a Manectric.


== Manectric ==
Manectric (ライボルト, Raiboruto, Livolt), known as the Discharge Pokémon, resembles a blue dog or wolf with a yellow mane and fur spots. Manectric collects electricity in the atmosphere using its mane, and discharges it at a later time. The sparks sometimes ignite forest fires. It is able to conjure thunderclouds to drop lightning bolts from. It rarely appears before people.
In Pokémon Trozei!, Lucy Fleetfoot owns a Manectric. Manectric makes an appearance in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky along with eight Electrike, attacking the player and their partner. In the anime, Manectric was first seen under the ownership of Wattson. Ash's Torkoal battled against it and lost. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Wattson had an Electrike that evolved into a Manectric, which sacrificed itself to take down a Ninjask. In the manga adaption of Arceus and the Jewel of Life, Marcus owns a Manectric and he uses it along with his other Pokémon to attack Arceus.


== Plusle ==
Plusle (プラスル, Purasuru, Prasle), known as the Cheering Pokémon, bears a remarkable resemblance to Pichu and Pikachu. Plusle have short tails with flat red plus signs on the end of them, while their cheeks are circular with plus signs voided in the middle. Plusle creates electrical pom-poms and sparks to cheer on its partners. Plusle's abilities in battle are basically the same as its cousin Pikachu except that Plusle has more Special Attack power than Pikachu and is slightly faster. However, Plusle is unable to use moves such as Volt Tackle and Slam. On the other hand, Plusle learns more support moves than Pikachu, such as Baton Pass, Fake Tears, and Copycat. Plusle is a cheerful and supportive Pokémon, always encouraging comrades in battle by using the spark pouches in its cheeks. It is very compassionate towards its friends, and is known to cry upon witnessing a friend lose a battle. They are commonly referred to as cheerleaders for these actions.


== Minun ==
Minun (マイナン, Mainan), known as the Cheering Pokémon, bears a remarkable resemblance to Pichu and Pikachu. Minun have short tails with flat blue minus signs on the end of them, while their cheeks and the tips of their ears are blue, and have minus signs voided in the middle. Minun creates electrical pom-poms and sparks to cheer on its partners. Minun's stats are geared towards defense whereas Plusle's stats are sweeper-oriented. Minun's Movepool is nearly identical to Plusle, except that Minun learns Charm and Trump Card and lacks Last Resort. Minun is a cheerful and supportive Pokémon, always encouraging comrades in battle by using the spark pouches in its cheeks. It is very compassionate towards its friends, and is known to cry upon witnessing a friend lose a battle. They are commonly referred to as cheerleaders for these actions.


== Volbeat ==

Volbeat (バルビート, Barubīto, Barubeat in original Japanese language versions), known as the Firefly Pokémon, has a body, wings, and face that are blue, and his body has two yellow stripes. His back as well as his arms and legs are black. His long, curly antennae are yellow with black stripes. The irises of his eyes are yellow, and his face seems to display a sad or forlorn expression. Possibly Volbeat's most important part is his glowing yellow tail, which it uses to communicate, draw patterns in the night sky, and use its move Tail Glow. Volbeat is a male-only species, with Illumise as its female counterpart.
Volbeat's first appearance was in the Camp Pikachu special that was part of the Pokémon Heroes movie. He served as a sort of camp counselor and guide. His first TV appearance was in Love at First Flight alongside his female counterpart Illumise. In Pokémon Pinball: Ruby and Sapphire, after a successful Travel Mode on the Ruby Field, Volbeat will fly down to paint in the new area.


== Illumise ==
Illumise (イルミーゼ, Irumīze), known as the Firefly Pokémon, has a black and blue body, with two vertical stripes going down the front. Her arms and legs are black as well, and are connected to the body by purple borders. On her front is what resembles a yellow bow or shawl. She has large, slanted eyes with blue irises, and appears to be smiling, unlike her male counterpart, Volbeat. Surrounding her head is a purple appendage with curls at the end that frame its face. Her antennae are also smaller than Volbeat's, and are yellow in color. Illumise has small wings used for flying with others of the species. Illumise has a pattern of three oblong yellow spots on its rear. With their sweet aromas, Illumise guide Volbeat in the night sky to draw various geometric patterns. Illumise is a female-only species, with Volbeat as its male counterpart.
In Pokémon Pinball: Ruby and Sapphire, after a successful Travel Mode on the Sapphire Field, Illumise will fly down to paint in the new area. In the anime, Illumise appeared with Volbeat in Love at First Flight.


== Roselia ==

Roselia (ロゼリア, Rozeria) is known as the Thorn Pokémon. Roselia's name is a portmanteau of "rose" and "rosalia", a type of melody. The species of flower, "azalea" may be another influence of its name. Another possible root of its name might be the country "Bulgaria", famous for its Rose Valley. In a demo of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl played at PokéJungle, a new Pokémon made its appearance, the evolved form of Roselia named Roserade, as Ken Sugimori had announced at the Pokémon Garden site; Ken Sugimori later stated the possibility of a pre-evolved form of Roselia as well, which was revealed to be Budew.


== Gulpin ==
Gulpin (ゴクリン, Gokurin, Gokulin in original Japanese language versions) are found in the Hoenn Region, and evolves to Swalot. It has a puddle-like appearance and a yellow leaf on what can only be described as its head. Gulpin has a big appetite and a deceptively small looking mouth. Its body is all stomach. There is absolutely nothing that a Gulpin won't eat, taking the idea of being an omnivore to an extreme. Its heart and brain are very small in comparison to its stomach, which holds special enzymes that can dissolve whatever it eats, including scrap iron.
As a Poison-type, it employs many moves of that type, including Toxic and Sludge, which may be better suited to Grimer and Muk than to Gulpin (though it is a Poison type and, therefore, would know Poison attacks). Gulpin holds the distinction of being the only pure Poison-type which predominant color is not blue or purple (though its shiny form is blue).
Gulpin appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a Poké Ball item, in which it engulfs an opponent and digests them, before spitting them back out. It also is a trophy.


== Swalot ==
Swalot (マルノーム, Marunōmu, Marunoom in original Japanese language versions) is one of the Pokémon found in the Hoenn Region. Swalot's name is a contraction of swallow and a lot, referring to this Pokémon's habit of eating and digesting things in large amounts. The Japanese name Marunoom comes from the Japanese words for wholly (丸ごと, marugoto) and swallow (呑む, nomu).
Swalot is a tall, purple, blob-like Pokémon. It has a single row of black diamonds running across its midsection. Swalot's hands have three fingers instead of two. Swalot has red, beady eyes and yellow whiskers (the females have whiskers too, but the female's whiskers are shorter than the male's).
Much like Gulpin, a Swalot can eat virtually anything, regardless of size, and its stomach acids can digest whatever it eats. The only thing a Swalot cannot digest, ironically, is its own stomach. A Swalot has no teeth, so its food goes down whole and gets melted away by the extremely acidic digestive juices. Unlike Gulpin, a Swalot's mouth is wider and more cavernous, so much so that an automobile tire can (and will) fit in it. A Swalot also sweats toxic fluids from its follicles to douse foes before digesting them. It is seen that Paul's older brother owns a Swalot.


== Carvanha ==
Carvanha (キバニア, Kibania, Kibanha in original Japanese language versions)'s name originates from the words "carve" and "piranha". Its Japanese name is a portmanteau of 牙 (kiba), fang, and the English word "piranha". Another possible origin is "carnivore" which means meat or flesh eater.
A Carvanha has a round body covered in tiny, sharp denticles which create hydrodynamic advantages by reducing turbulence when swimming, as well as provide protection against physical attacks. The top half of Carvanha's spherical body is blue, while the bottom half is red, with a yellow star-shaped emblem below its mouth. Carvanha has two yellow dorsal fins above its eyes that resemble shark fins, and a matching pelvic fin on its belly. Its pectoral fins are also yellow. The caudal fin is composed of two red spines with a thin yellow membrane stretched between them. Carvanhas also have skin so rough that many who have felt it compare the sensation to being scratched with sandpaper. Carvanhas are also exceptionally fast swimmers, unlike their evolved form, Sharpedo.
Much like a real piranha, Carvanhas are pack hunters and will attack anything in the ocean that threatens them. However, without its strength in numbers, Carvanhas are weak and timid. Carvanhas have powerful jaws that can tear through a boat hull (which has led to many ships being sunk in the Pokémon world). Living in the same route as Feebas, Carvanha is more often seen than Feebas.
In the games, Carvanha is perhaps the frailest Pokémon in history. Carvanha managed to barely fight out Deoxys-Attack form for even worse defenses by having the same defense stats and 45 HP instead of 50. It also has more weaknesses, further adding insult to injury. It makes frail-ish Pokémon like Ninjask and Liepard look like gods when it comes to defense. It has been shown that Jolteon's Thunder attack can hit Carvanha for up to 5,200,000 damage. That's three times the number of dislikes on the Friday video. Don't fuck with Jolteon. Even Starly has better bulk than that piranha.


== Sharpedo ==
Sharpedo (サメハダー, Samehadā, Samehader in original Japanese language versions) originates from the words shark and torpedo. Sharp may be another influence on its name. The Japanese name, 鮫肌 (samehada), means "shark skin". Sharpedo's body is torpedo shaped, much like the head and trunk section of a real shark. Its body is covered in tiny, sharp denticles which create hydrodynamic advantages by reducing turbulence when swimming, as well as cause damage to foes to that attack it with physical moves. Sharpedo is colored blue with a white underbelly. The yellow star emblem it had as a Carvanha has migrated to its snout. Another star emblem is on its rear. Sharpedo has a tall dorsal fin with two notches cut into it, with a pelvic fin directly opposite it, and the two pectoral fins arranged so that they resemble the fins on the back of a torpedo. Sharpedo also has two gill slits directly behind each eye.
Nicknamed "The Bully of the Sea", Sharpedo are generally dreaded and distrusted in the Pokémon world. Sharpedo move through the sea by swimming at speeds of up to 75 miles per hour (120 km/h) by forcing water out of its rear. Despite its vigor, Sharpedo has relatively low stamina, and cannot swim great distances. Its teeth are strong enough to bite through sheet metal and can regrow quickly if any are broken. Because of its unruly, destructive behavior and its powerful teeth and jaws, it only takes a single Sharpedo to turn a supertanker into a mess of floating metal.
Sharpedo gains a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.


== References ==