PEC University of Technology, formerly known as Punjab Engineering College (Hindi: पंजाब इंजिनियरिंग कॉलेज, PEC), is an engineering institute located in the city of Chandigarh, India. Founded in 1921, it is one of the oldest institutes in India.


== History ==
The university was originally established as Mugalpura Engineering College at Lahore (now in Pakistan) on November 9, 1921. The name of the college was later changed to Maclagan Engineering College in March 1924. In the year 1931, the college was affiliated to Punjab University, Lahore. After partition in 1947, the college was relocated to Roorkee in India and was renamed as East Punjab College of Engineering. In the year 1950 the word East was dropped. Towards the end of December 1953, the college shifted to its present campus in Chandigarh to function under the Government of Punjab. In 1966, with the formation of the Union Territory of Chandigarh, the college came under the control of the Government of India through the Chandigarh Administration. In October 2003, the Government of India recognized the college as a Deemed University and thereafter it became known as Punjab Engineering College (Deemed University). In 2009, the Board of Governors renamed the institution as PEC University of Technology.
In 1994 this institution was adjudged the best technical college in India by the National Foundation of Engineers. It occupies an area of 146 acres. Up to 1962, the college consisted of three departments of Civil, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering. Thereafter the college expanded and offers Bachelor of Engineering degrees in various specializations.
Highway Engineering was the first post-graduate course offered by the college, commencing in 1957. Presently there are eleven post-graduate courses leading to a Masters of Engineering degree. Facilities for post-graduate studies exist for regular as well as for part-time students. The college has facilities for research work leading to the award of Ph.D. degree in engineering in certain selected fields of different disciplines. The college also offers consultancy services in different disciplines.


== Rankings ==
The university was ranked #9 in the limited participation CSR-GHRDC Engineering Colleges Survey 2013. It was ranked #16 in the Mint Top 50 Government Engineering Colleges Survey of 2009.


== Collaborations ==
The college has collaborated with national and international educational institutions for student exchange programs. MoUs have been signed with corporates to attract projects and internships. Some of these collaborations are:
PEC-ESIGELEC France collaboration (Feb, 2009)
PEC-ABB collaboration (Jan, 2009)
PEC-UWA collaboration (Jan, 2009)
PEC-JCB collaboration initiated (Sep, 2008)
PEC-Philips collaboration (Sep, 2008)
PEC-CSIO collaboration (Aug, 2008)


== Courses ==
Bachelor of Engineering in :
Aerospace Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Materials and Metallurgical Engineering, Production & Industrial Engineering.
The institute also offers Master of Technology degrees in the following specializations:
Highways, Structures, Hydraulics and Irrigation, Rotodynamic Machines, Electrical Power Systems, Environmental Engineering (Interdisciplinary), Electronics Metallurgical Engineering, C.I.M.


== Cultural and technical festivals ==


=== PecFest ===
PecFest is a cultural festival organized by the students of the university. Events include quizzes, workshops, game shows, informal events, fashion show (Glitterati), dance show (Groovz), rock night, Pronite, and a city-level beauty peagant.


=== Vyom ===
Vyom (earlier known as Technique before being renamed in 2011) was the university's annual technical festival that ran from 2008 to 2013. It was discontinued in 2014 and the technical events are now conducted as part of PecFest.


== Intranet ==
The institute also maintains its own intranet portal, which is accessible round the clock at Intranet Site but only via the institute's WiFi.


== Student organizations ==
Technical societies
AeSI - Aeronautical Society of India
AMS - Aero-Modelling Society
ASCE - American Society of Civil Engineers (Student Chapter)
ISTE - Indian Society For Technical Engineers (Student Chapter)
IEEE - The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers Student Chapter
IETE - The Institute of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers Student Forum
SAE - The Society of Automotive Engineers Student Chapter
SME - The Society of Manufacturing Engineers Student Chapter
IIF - The Institute of Indian Foundrymen Student Chapter
The Robotics Society
Clubs
Projection Design Club
Communications Club
Music Club
Robotics Club
Speakers Association And Study Circle
Dramatics Club
Art and Photography Club
Energy and Envirovision Club
Rotaract Club
English Editorial Board
Hindi Editorial Board
Punjabi Editorial Board
Cell
Student Counselling Cell (Happy Folks of PEC)
Entrepreneurship Incubation Cell


== Hostels ==
There are four hostels for boys and two hostels for girls. Each hostel is self-contained with amenities such as reading room/indoor games/T.V. room, dining hall and mess.


== Notable alumni ==
Jaspal Bhatti - satirist, comedian, film-maker; B.E. Electrical (1978).
Kalpana Chawla - Space Shuttle Columbia astronaut; B.E. Aeronautical (1982).
Gaurav Dhillon - founder and former CEO of Informatica Corporation and CEO and founder of the online movie site Jaman.
Vijay K. Dhir - Dean of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science
Adesh Pratap Singh Kairon - Punjab politician
Rakesh Kapania - Norris and Laura Mitchell Professor of Aerospace Engineering, Aerospace and Ocean Engineering, Virginia Tech
Vanya Mishra - Model and Miss India 2012
Chandra Mohan, co-founded Punjab Tractors Limited; Mechanical.
Sunil Saigal - Dean, Newark College of Engineering at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), B.E. Civil (1978).
Badshah (Aditya P Singh), Punjabi singer and rapper; BE Civil Engineering (2006)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official PEC website
Punjab Engineering College Old Students Association