The Western Hemisphere is a geographical term for the half of the earth that lies west of the prime meridian (which crosses Greenwich, England) and east of the antimeridian, the other half being called the Eastern Hemisphere.
In this sense, the Western Hemisphere consists of the Americas, the western portions of Europe and Africa, the extreme eastern tip of Russia, numerous territories in Oceania, and a portion of Antarctica, while excluding some of the Aleutian Islands to the southwest of the Alaskan mainland.
In an effort to define the Western Hemisphere as the parts of the world which are not part of the Old World, there also exist projections which use the 20th meridian west and the diametrically opposed 160th meridian east to define the hemisphere. This projection excludes the European and African mainlands and a small portion of northeast Greenland, but includes more of eastern Russia and Oceania.
The population of the geographical Western Hemisphere exceeds 1 billion. Of the four hemispheres, only the Southern Hemisphere is less populated.
The highest mountain in the Western Hemisphere is Aconcagua in the Andes of Argentina at 6,960.8 metres (22,837 ft). 


== Countries in both hemispheresEdit ==
Below is a list of the countries which are in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres on the IERS Reference Meridian, in order from north to south:
 Denmark (due to Greenland and the Faroe Islands; mainland Denmark lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere).
 Norway (due to Jan Mayen; mainland Norway lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere).
 United Kingdom
 Netherlands (The islands of the Netherlands Antilles lie entirely within the Western Hemisphere while the European Netherlands lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere).
 France
 Spain
 Algeria
 Mali
 Burkina Faso
 Togo
 Ghana
Below is a list of the countries which are in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres along the 180th meridian, in order from north to south:
 Russia
 United States (United States islands)
 Kiribati
 Tuvalu
 Wallis and Futuna (France)
 Fiji
 New Zealand (Kermadec and Chatham Island groups are east of the 180th meridian)


== Countries in the Western Hemisphere but not in the AmericasEdit ==
The following nations lie outside the Americas yet are in part or entirely within the Western Hemisphere.
 Algeria
 American Samoa (United States of America)
 Burkina Faso
 Cape Verde
 Cook Islands
 Faroe Islands (Denmark)
 Fiji
 France (Metropolitan)
 French Polynesia
 Wallis and Futuna

 Gambia
 Ghana
 Greenland (Denmark) (note: geographically a part of North America, but politically a part of Europe)
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Ivory Coast
 Kiribati
 Liberia
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Morocco
 Western Sahara

 Niue
 Portugal
 Russia
 Samoa
 Senegal
 Sierra Leone
 Spain
 Togo
 Tokelau (New Zealand)
 Tonga
 Tuvalu
 United Kingdom
 Gibraltar
 Guernsey
 Isle of Man
 Jersey
 Pitcairn Islands
 Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
 Falkland Islands


== SourcesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
 Media related to Western Hemisphere at Wikimedia Commons