Red is the fourth studio album by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. It was released on October 22, 2012, by Big Machine Records, as the follow-up to her third studio album, Speak Now (2010). The album title was inspired by the "semi-toxic relationships" that Swift experienced during the process of conceiving this album, which Swift described the emotions she felt as "red emotions" due to their intense and tumultuous nature. Red touches on Swift's signature themes of love and heartbreak, however, from a more mature perspective while exploring other themes such as fame and the pressure of being in the limelight. The album features collaborations with producers and guest artists such as Gary Lightbody of Snow Patrol and Ed Sheeran and is noted for Swift's experimentation with new musical genres. Swift completed The Red Tour in support of the album on June 12, 2014, which became the highest-grossing tour of all time by a country artist, grossing over $150 million.
Red was well received by critics, who reacted favorably to Swift's transition from her country roots in favor of pop sounds. At the 56th Grammy Awards, Red was nominated for Best Country Album, giving Swift her third consecutive nomination in the category, and the prestigious Album of the Year, marking Swift's second nomination for Album of the Year at the Grammys, following her 2010 victory with Fearless (2008). This gave Swift the distinction of being the first country act to be nominated twice in the Album of the Year category at the Grammys in the 2010s.
Red debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart, giving Swift her third consecutive chart topper in the US. Its first week sales of 1.21 million was the third biggest debut in history for a female artist and became the fastest-selling album in over a decade. It made music history for claiming the biggest first week sales of all time by a country act, the record previously held by Garth Brooks. Red is just the 18th album in United States history to sell one million copies in a single week. It was also a huge global success, becoming Swift's first chart-topper in the UK, and also topped the album charts in Australia, Canada, Ireland and New Zealand while charted in the top ten in every other major market including China.
Worldwide, it has sold 6 million copies as of August 2014. Red became the best-selling country album of 2012, making it her third consecutive top-seller and the second best-seller overall across all genres despite being out only for two months. This makes the fourth time Swift has an album ranked in the year's top three sellers. Red has been certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), making it Swift's fourth consecutive album to reach this plateau.


== Background and releaseEdit ==

On August 13, 2012, Swift gave a live webchat to over 72,500 viewers, in which she answered fan questions, previewed the lead single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", and announced her fourth album's title as Red, as well as its release date. Swift also revealed the meaning behind her album's title:

All the different emotions that are written about on this album are all pretty much about the kind of tumultuous, crazy, insane, intense, semi-toxic relationships that I've experienced in the last two years. All those emotions — spanning from intense love, intense frustration, jealousy, confusion, all of that — in my mind, all those emotions are red. You know, there's nothing in between. There's nothing beige about any of those feelings.

During the live webchat, she also revealed that she wrote more than 30 songs for the album, of which she included 16 for the album and expressed that dysfunctional relationships can provide a lot of inspiration. Contrary to her previous self-written album Speak Now (2010), Swift enlisted the help of several of her favorite songwriters. In an interview with MTV News, the singer revealed that the album "is interesting because each song stands on its own. It's this patchwork quilt of different sounds and different emotions, and I don't think anything on the record sounds like We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". She also previewed songs from the album on Good Morning America every Monday, beginning on September 24 until October 15. Swift performed on October 22 for the album's release, and the next day, she performed a live concert on the same show. According to the singer she had spent over two years with the recording process, writing and preparation for the album. Sarah Barlow shot the album's cover, which shows Swift's face, particularly her red lipstick. The standard and deluxe versions of the album were released on October 22, 2012 in Italy, New Zealand, the United States, among others. A karaoke version of the album was also released on February 5, 2013 on the iTunes Store, which includes the instrumental version from all tracks of its standard version.


== Critical receptionEdit ==
Red received generally positive reviews from critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews and ratings from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 77, based on 23 reviews. Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone felt Swift had been influenced by Joni Mitchell and U2, writing that "her self-discovery project is one of the best stories in pop. When she's really on, her songs are like tattoos." Billboard called the album "her most interesting full-length to date" and said it "puts Swift the artist front and center with big, beefy hooks that transcend her country roots for a genre-spanning record that reaches heights unseen since Shania Twain's Up!." Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called Red a pop record that showed almost no trace of country and said although Swift's lyrics about romantic relationships and social anxiety still sound somewhat clumsy, they do not detract from "the pristine pop confections" that comprise the music: "If anything, these ungainly, awkward phrasings humanizes this mammoth pop monolith: she's constructed something so precise its success seems preordained, but underneath it all, Taylor is still twitchy, which makes Red not just catchy but compelling." Spin magazine's Michael Robbins found Swift "too smart and tuneful to condescend to her contradictions" on the album's augmented pop songs. In the Los Angeles Times, Randall Roberts was impressed by her ability to incorporate different musical styles as she "strives for something much more grand and accomplished" than a cynical point of view. Sputnikmusic critic Channing Freeman claimed that Red showcased Swift's definite transition from country to pop, with music that unlike on her previous records is "a complement to all of those conflicting emotions that have been present in her lyrics for some time now".
Jonathan Keefe from Slant Magazine was less enthusiastic and said as a pop record, it was not consistent enough to be considered "truly great" because a number of songs lacked Swift's "usual spark". Nonetheless, he concluded that "its highlights are career-best work for Swift, who now sounds like the pop star she was destined to be all along." Michael Gallucci from The A.V. Club found Swift's lyrics somewhat more "deeper and darker", and the music far more ambitious than her previous records, but overall a "complicated and sometimes unfocused" pop record. He dismissed the duets as boring, while calling "State of Grace" and "All Too Well" "fascinating work". Arnold Pan from PopMatters believed some of the songs should have been edited out on what was a transitional album for Swift, who eschewed her country-pop roots in favor of "beefed-up modern rock" stylings. Writing for MSN Music, Robert Christgau viewed Red as a minor version of the Magnetic Fields' 1999 album 69 Love Songs. He preferred its feistier tracks but also appreciated the more sentimental songs "Begin Again" and "Stay Stay Stay", which "stay happy and hit just as hard".


=== AccoladesEdit ===
Red was included on many year-end best-of lists. The album appeared at the runner-up spot on Associated Press and Idolator, with the latter saying that "Red showcased [Swift] abilities marvelously, in finely hewn details, the most varied production styles of her career and storytelling that remains as emotionally ass-whooping as any artist with her reach." Jon Caramanica of The New York Times also ranked Red number two on his top ten albums list, stating that "[Swift] goes Day-Glo on the most unexpected moments of this album, her fourth and the first that stops pretending she's anything but a pop megastar." MTV ranked Red number three, stating that "Swift takes tremendous strides towards becoming a genuine artist, the kind equally adept at penning heartbreakers." The album appeared at number five on Billboard‍ '​s top ten best albums of 2012, saying that "Red will likely be remembered for its sonic risks, with the pop of "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" and the dubstep wobbles of "I Knew You Were Trouble" pushing the country star out of her comfort zone." In January 2015, the album was placed at number 12 on Billboard‍ '​s list of "The 20 Best Albums of 2010s (So Far)".The Daily Beast writer Marlow Stern ranked the album at number seven, calling it "an uneven LP that nonetheless contains a diverse array of infectious tunes." while Glenn Gamboa of Newsday ranked the album number six, stating that Taylor "comes out as a full-fledged pop superstar." Red also ranked at number ten on both The Salt Lake Tribune and HitFix. Rolling Stone ranked the album thirty-first on their album list.
Songs from the album have received Grammy Award nominations. "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" was nominated for Record of the Year at the 55th Grammy Awards, but lost to "Somebody That I Used to Know" by Gotye and Kimbra. "Begin Again" received a Best Country Song nomination at the 56th Grammy Awards. Red also received nominations for Album of the Year and Best Country Album at the 56th Grammy Awards.


== Commercial performanceEdit ==


=== North AmericaEdit ===

Red was a huge commercial success. In the United States, Red became the fastest-selling album in over a decade after selling 1.21 million copies in its first week, and earned Swift her third No. 1 album on the Billboard 200. Red has the second highest first week sum by a female artist, only behind Britney Spears' Oops!... I Did It Again (2000), which opened with 1.3 million units. Red had the biggest sales week in 2012 and outsold the top 52 albums in the Billboard 200 on its first week. It has also the biggest one week sales for a country album beating Garth Brooks' Double Live which sold 1.085 million copies in 1998. Red sold 465,000 digital copies in its first week in the US, which is the second biggest after Lady Gaga's Born This Way (2011). It sold around 1.459 million copies worldwide in its first week of sales. In its second week on the Billboard 200, the album remained at No. 1 and sold 344,000 copies (down 72%). Next week Red held atop the Billboard 200 and sold a further 196,000 copies (down 43%) which brought its sales to 1.749 million, thus ranking the third biggest selling album of 2012 behind Adele's 21 and One Direction's Up All Night. The album was dethroned by One Direction's Take Me Home on its fourth week. In its seventh week, Red climbed back to No. 1 on the Billboard 200 selling 167,000 and with that, Swift became tied with Jay-Z and Whitney Houston for fourth most-weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking in 1991.

Swift held the Billboard 200 top spot the next two weeks, thus making Swift the first artist since The Beatles in 1969 to log six or more weeks at No. 1 with three consecutive studio albums, following Fearless (eleven weeks) and Speak Now (six weeks). Also, this is the third time that Swift has had the No. 1 album in the last week before Christmas, which is traditionally the most competitive week of the year. She also achieved the feat with Fearless in 2008 and Speak Now in 2010. Red spent its seventh non-consecutive week at No. 1 in the sales week ending Dec 30, 2012, selling 241,000 (down 12%). This gave Swift a total of 24 weeks atop the Billboard 200 throughout her career, tying her with Adele as the woman with most weeks at No. 1 since SoundScan began tabulating the Billboard 200 in May 1991. Swift later surpassed this record with the release of her album 1989. Red finished 2012 as the second biggest album despite being out for only two months, selling 3.11 million. It makes the fourth time she has an album ranked in the year's top three sellers. As of October 2015, the album has sold 4,246,000 copies in the US.
In Canada, Red ranks Swift's third No. 1 album as well selling 93,000 copies on its debut week and has easily crossed the Platinum certification in the country. With that sales, Red became the biggest one week sales in Canada since Michael Bublé's Christmas moved 107,000 copies last Christmas season of 2011 and the biggest first week sales since 2008. To date, Red has been certified triple platinum by Music Canada with shipments exceeding 240,000 copies.


=== Europe and OceaniaEdit ===
Red was also commercially successful outside the United States. In the United Kingdom, Swift garnered her first No. 1 album with Red with sales of 61,000 copies on its opening week. In Australia, the album debuted at No. 1 and spent a total of three consecutive weeks at the top, becoming Swift's longest running No. 1 album in Australia; Red was certified 4× platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments exceeding 280,000 copies. In New Zealand, the album also became Swift's third No. 1 album, and has been certified platinum by the RIANZ. Worldwide, Swift set a new worldwide iTunes Store record for highest ever first-week album sales with 566,000 copies sold digitally around the globe. Later, this record was beat by Justin Timberlake's album The 20/20 Experience (580,000 copies during its first week). The album has sold over six million copies worldwide.


== PromotionEdit ==


=== SinglesEdit ===
The album's lead single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", was released on August 13 and became Swift's first No. 1 single on the US Billboard Hot 100. The song's jump from its debut position No. 72 to No. 1 was the result of a massive digital demand of the song. With 623,000 downloads, the song placed second among all-time best week sales singles, behind Flo Rida's 2009 hit "Right Round." It stayed at No. 1 for three non-consecutive weeks, being displaced twice at the top, first by "Flo Rida's "Whistle" and second by Maroon 5's "One More Night". The song stayed in the top ten for thirteen weeks and charted for a total of twenty-four weeks. In UK, it peaked at No. 4, giving her her first top ten hit since "Love Story" (2008) and the song became her first No. 1 song in New Zealand. As of December 2012, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" has sold more than three million downloads in the US.
"Begin Again" was released to the iTunes Store on September 25, 2012 as part of a countdown to the album release. A few hours after its early release to iTunes, it shot to No. 1, thereby becoming the first single to dethrone Psy's "Gangnam Style" in a week. The song sold 299,000 digital copies in its first week of release and debuted at No. 7 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart dated October 4, 2012. It was later announced that the track, would be serviced to country radio on October 1, 2012 as the second single from the album. The song became her seventeenth consecutive top ten hit in US Billboard Hot Country Songs, but also tied with "Fearless" as her lowest-charting single on the said chart although it reached No. 3 on Billboard Country Airplay.
"I Knew You Were Trouble" was released as the second international single from Red on November 14, 2012 in UK. In the US, it was released on November 27, 2012 as the third single. The song debuted at No. 3 on Billboard Hot 100 with 416,000 copies sold in its first week, Swift's second largest first week singles sales. It became Swift's fourteenth top ten hit and her eleventh song to debut inside the top ten. With sales of 416,000 from "I Knew You Were Trouble", Swift became the first artist in digital history to have two songs that debuted with sales of 400,000 or more copies. In its eleventh week, it sold a massive sum of 582,000 in the US, making it the fourth biggest digital sales week of all time. It caused the song to re-peak at No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100. "I Knew You Were Trouble" became a commercial success, selling over three million copies in the US and reaching No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 Airplay and Billboard Pop Songs, and also reached the top ten in ten countries.
"22" was released as the fourth single from Red. It was sent to Australian radio on February 4, 2013. It was released in the United States on March 12, 2013. The music video was released on YouTube on March 13, 2013. The song was released in the United Kingdom on April 1, 2013. It peaked at No. 20 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming the first single from Red to miss the top ten. As of May 2013, the song has sold 1,000,000 copies in the United States.
"Red", the album's title track, was released to Country radio on June 24, 2013 as the third Country single. The song debuted at No. 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and at No. 2 on the Hot Digital Songs chart selling 312,000 in its first week. It also debuted at No. 2 on the Hot Country Songs chart, behind Swift's "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". As of May 2013, the song has sold 1,000,000 copies in the United States.
"Everything Has Changed", which features British singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran, was released as the fourth international single as well as the fourth U.S. Pop/Mainstream single on July 16, 2013.
"The Last Time", featuring Snow Patrol lead vocalist Gary Lightbody, was later confirmed as the fifth and final international single and seventh and final from Red. A UK release was announced as of October 13, 2013, and it subsequently impacted UK contemporary hit radio on November 4, 2013. The release of the single coincides with the announcement of the dates for the European leg of her international Red Tour.


=== Promotional singlesEdit ===
During the four weeks preceding the release of Red, one track was released each week digitally on the iTunes Store after a preview of it had been heard on Good Morning America. The first of the four promotional singles is "Begin Again", which was released digitally on iTunes on September 25, 2012. "Red" is the second promotional single off the album, and became available for download on October 2, 2012. "Red" debuted at No. 6 on the Hot 100 with sales of 312,000. "I Knew You Were Trouble" is the third promotional single off the album, and became available for download on October 9, 2012. The fourth and final promotional single is "State of Grace", which became available for download on October 16, 2012. Each of them reached No. 1 on iTunes and the top 15 on the Billboard Hot 100, with "I Knew You Were Trouble" having the highest peak at No. 2 as Swift's 14th top 10 song. With sales of 416,000 from "I Knew You Were Trouble", Swift became the first artist in digital history to have two songs that debuted with sales of 400,000 or more copies.


== Track listingEdit ==


== Credits and personnelEdit ==
Credits adapted from AllMusic:
Technical and production


== ChartsEdit ==


=== All Time ChartEdit ===


== CertificationsEdit ==


== Release historyEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Red at Taylor Swift official site: includes lyrics of all tracks.
Red at Metacritic