Cigarettes and Valentines is an unreleased album by punk rock band Green Day. The album would have been the proper follow-up to 2000's Warning. In the summer of 2003, the album was nearly finished when the master recordings of 20 tracks were stolen from the studio. Instead of re-recording the album, the band decided to start from scratch, leading to the creation of American Idiot.


== HistoryEdit ==
Lead singer Billie Joe Armstrong said the album's material was "good stuff". Musically, the material on Cigarettes and Valentines was hard, "quick-tempoed punk" songs in the vein of Green Day's Kerplunk and Insomniac. This sound would have contrasted the group's previous two studio albums, Nimrod and Warning, which displayed more rock and folk punk genres respectively. Bassist Mike Dirnt described the band's decision of returning to the sound found on their older albums, stating, "We've had a nice break from making hard and fast music and it's made us want to do it again." However, Green Day would later call the theft a "blessing in disguise", believing the album wasn't "maximum Green Day". Dirnt admitted that backups of the tapes were made but claims that "it just wasn't the same as the originals". Cigarettes and Valentines was never even roughly mixed, according to various interviews with the band, hence no "legitimate" versions of songs, track lists, and artwork exist.


=== Controversy regarding The NetworkEdit ===

The Network's album Money Money 2020, released on September 30, 2003, through Billie Joe Armstrong's Adeline Records, was speculated by some fans as being a re-recording of the album, or to contain aspects of it. Armstrong has denied any connection between the two projects in various interviews. Mike Dirnt is the only band member who has said he is a part of The Network on March 1, 2013.


== Live performances and other appearancesEdit ==
The title song, "Cigarettes and Valentines" was first played live at the concert in Greenwood Village, Colorado on August 28, 2010, during the band's concert at the Comfort Dental Amphitheatre while on their 21st Century Breakdown World Tour. This show was being filmed to eventually contribute to the forthcoming live album, leading to speculation that some of the songs from the Cigarettes and Valentines sessions would eventually be released. During the same performance Green Day also performed the song "Olivia", which also originates from these unreleased sessions. These songs were also performed during other dates on the same tour. "Cigarettes and Valentines" saw an official release on Awesome as Fuck. "Too Much Too Soon", a B-side on the "American Idiot" single, was a track originally from Cigarettes and Valentines. On February 14, 2011, the official lyric video for the song was released on Green Day's official YouTube channel. Four days later, the official video for the song was released there as well. A live promo single was released on February 21, 2011 containing 2:43 of the performance in Phoenix, Arizona (the shots of the crowd are from the concert in Buenos Aires, Argentina).


== ReferencesEdit ==