Open Society Foundations (OSF), formerly the Open Society Institute, is an international grantmaking network founded by progressive-liberal business magnate George Soros. Open Society Foundations financially support civil society groups around the world, with a stated aim of advancing justice, education, public health and independent media.
The OSF has branches in 37 countries, encompassing a group of country and regional foundations, such as the Open Society Initiative for West Africa, and the Open Society Initiative for Southern Africa; its headquarters are in New York. 
Since its founding in 1993, OSF has reported expenditures of over $11 billion. The group's name is inspired by Karl Popper's 1945 book The Open Society and Its Enemies.


== HistoryEdit ==
On May 28, 1984, Soros signed a contract between the Soros Foundation (New York) and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the founding document of the Soros Foundation Budapest. This was followed by several foundations in the region to help countries move away from communism.
Open Society Institute was created in the United States in 1993 to support the Soros foundations in Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. In 2002, it launched the Open Society Justice Initiative, a program that seeks to support Open Society's objectives through strategic litigation before human rights tribunals, as well as research, legal advocacy and technical assistance to governments.
In August 2010, it started using the name of Open Society Foundations (OSF) to better reflect its role as a funder for civil society groups around the world.
Soros believes there can be no absolute answers to political questions because the same principle of reflexivity applies as in financial markets.
In 2012, Christopher Stone joined the OSF as the second president. He replaced Aryeh Neier, who served as president from 1993 to 2012.


== ActivitiesEdit ==

The Open Society Foundations annual expenditure of $827 million in 2014  made it the second largest private philanthropy in the United States, after the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
In 2014, OSF reported granting at least $33 million to civil rights and social justice organizations in the United States.
Its U.S. funding included groups such as the Organization for Black Struggle and Missourians Organizing for Reform and Empowerment that supported protests in the wake of the shooting of Trayvon Martin, the death of Eric Garner, the shooting of Tamir Rice and the shooting of Michael Brown. According to the Center for Responsive Politics, while OSF spends much of its resources on democratic causes around the world, it has also contributed to political advocacy groups such as the Tides Foundation.
OSF has been a major financial supporter of U.S. immigration reform, including a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants, and net neutrality.
OSF projects have included the National Security and Human Rights Campaign and the Lindesmith Center, which conducted research on drug reform.
The Library of Congress Soros Foundation Visiting Fellows Program was initiated in 1990.


== CriticismEdit ==
Critics on the left have argued that the Open Society Foundations serve to perpetuate institutions which reinforce the existing social order. Nicolas Guilhot, writing in Critical Sociology, connects the Soros charities to the history of capitalist philanthropy maintained by the Ford Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation, among others. Guilhot argues that control over the social sciences by monied interests has depoliticized this field and reinforced a capitalist view of modernization. He argues that despite critiques of malfunctioning free markets, Soros is actually a neoliberal who believes that competitive markets are the best way to organize society. According to this view, the apparent radicalism of Soros' "open society" serves as cover for the capitalist order, the basic rules of which are never actually questioned or "opened".
Glenn Beck has accused Soros of using OSF to intentionally undermine societies with the intention of establishing a unitary global government. Beck has argued that the Open Society Foundations have too much control over academics and media, and in some countries have obtained political power that qualifies them as "shadow governments".
Some its activities in Africa have been met with controversy, including an effort in the African Great Lakes region aimed at spreading human rights awareness among prostitutes in Uganda and other nations in the area. In 2008, this initiative was not received well by the Ugandan authorities, who considered it an effort to legalize and legitimize prostitution.


== See alsoEdit ==
Alliance for Open Society International
Budapest Open Access Initiative
Central European University
Colour revolution
DOAJ
Open society
Transparency International
Transparify


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further readingEdit ==
Carothers, Thomas (1999), Aiding Democracy Abroad: The Learning Curve, Washington DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace .
Krizsán, Andrea; Zentai, Viola, eds. (2003), Reshaping Globalization: Multilateral Dialogues and New Policy Initiatives, Budapest: Central European University Press .
Miniter, Richard (2011-09-09), "Should George Soros be allowed to buy US foreign policy?", Forbes .
Palley, Thomas (2003), "The Open Institute and Global Social Policy", Global Social Policy 3 (1): 17–18, doi:10.1177/1468018103003001312 .
Roelofs, Joan (2003), Foundations and Public Policy: The Mask of Pluralism, Albany: SUNY .
Stone, Diane (2010), Transnational Philanthropy or Policy Transfer? The Transnational Norms of the Open Society Institute, Policy and Politics 38 (2), pp. 269–87 .
——— (July 2007), "Market Principles, Philanthropic Ideals and Public Service Values: The Public Policy Program at the Central European University", PS: Political Science and Politics: 545–51 .
Peizer, Jonathan (2005), "The Internet Program: Web Surfing a Revolution", The Dynamics of Technology for Social Change, Ingram Book Group, pp. 1–26 .


== External linksEdit ==
Open Society Foundations official website
Open Society archives