The third season of the American television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., which is based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. (Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement, and Logistics Division), revolves around the character of Phil Coulson and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents and allies, who begin a secret mission to assemble a team of super-powered individuals, such as the Inhumans, to deal with new threats to the world, while others are also tracking down members of the group. It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), sharing continuity with the films of the franchise. The first episode of the season premiered in Los Angeles on September 23, 2015, with the season, consisting of 22 episodes, airing on ABC beginning on September 29. It is produced by ABC Studios, Marvel Television, and Mutant Enemy Productions, with Jed Whedon, Maurissa Tancharoen, and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners.
A third season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was ordered in May 2015, with production beginning late that July. Alongside Clark Gregg, who reprises his role as Coulson from the film series, principal cast members Ming-Na Wen, Brett Dalton, Chloe Bennet, Iain De Caestecker, Elizabeth Henstridge, Nick Blood, and Adrianne Palicki return from previous seasons, as do Henry Simmons and Luke Mitchell, now promoted to series regulars from their status as recurring characters in season two. Other characters from previous MCU media, including the films, also appear. The season takes inspiration from the Secret Warriors comic series, combining it with the Inhuman storyline introduced in the previous season. Glenn Hetrick created prosthetics for the less-human looking Inhumans, and Legacy Effects provided additional practical effects and props.
The season premiere was watched by 4.90 million viewers, higher than the entire second half of season two.


== EpisodesEdit ==


== Cast and charactersEdit ==


== ProductionEdit ==


=== DevelopmentEdit ===
In March 2014, executive producer Jeffrey Bell stated at the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. PaleyFest panel that the producers and the writers are able to read the screenplays for upcoming Marvel Cinematic Universe films to know where the universe is heading, which allowed them to form a general plan for the show through the end of a third season. The series was renewed for a third season on May 7, 2015. By April 2015, Marvel had been developing a spinoff series to accompany it, starring Adrianne Palicki and Nick Blood, but ABC opted not to go ahead with it, with entertainment president Paul Lee saying, "We thought the right thing now is to leave [Palicki and Blood] on S.H.I.E.L.D., because S.H.I.E.L.D. is so strong on the moment".


=== WritingEdit ===
Writing for the season was revealed to begin in early June 2015, with the season beginning three months after the events that concluded the second season. Following the end of the second season, Bell pointed out that S.H.I.E.L.D. "was pretty decimated and went underground after [Captain America: The Winter Soldier] and we found we like our team in that position, as underdogs, as opposed to a giant, powerful, NSA organization that can do pretty much anything. So the fact that we’re covert, the fact that we have to operate in the shadows is a good place for us storytelling-wise, and the fact that there might be other pockets of S.H.I.E.L.D. out there, as we learned [last] season, promises continued growth. But I don’t think Coulson is in any hurry to turn it into this giant corporate structure again — he likes it the way it is." Regarding the characters that could appear in the season, Bell said in May 2015 that "The idea of some familiar faces with some new faces is something to look forward to. I also think finding some new Marvel characters to pull into the universe would be cool. Fans seem to respond when there are characters from the Marvel comics and Marvel Cinematic Universe. We’ll also continue to create our own mythology as we’ve done. It’s a whole new world."
When asked about possible hints made in the season two finale towards an adaptation of Secret Warriors, Bell replied "Well, Daisy Johnson certainly has a big part in Secret Warriors and having a team like that. If you'll notice, Coulson says right now she is the only person in what might be this new outfit. But you know, the idea of a team of powered people is something we've seen in the show, and I think there's a world down the road where we do our version. We do our version of all these things so they may not be Secret Warriors but there's a whole lot of super-powered people fighting super-powered people. That's not really what we do or what we can even do on a weekly series. But tipping our hats to that direction I think is something we're suggesting there in the new season." Elaborating on this and the series dealing with the many powered people introduced in season two, Bell said, "People seem to respond to powered people on the show and while it’s not going to take over and become what the show’s about, as a texture and flavor of the stories, we really enjoy that. The fact that Inhumans are now out there is something I think we need to investigate and 22 episodes makes for a long season." Executive producer Maurissa Tancharoen stated it would be "a very slow build" with the Secret Warriors equalling their comic counterpoints, saying, "It’s in very, very nascent stages when we first come into the season," with executive producer Jed Whedon adding, "It’s something that’s a long-term goal of Coulson’s, but right now they’re in such emergency mode [with the influx of Inhuman appearances] and there are so many things standing in their way." Bell later clarified that characters would not have to be Inhuman to join the Secret Warriors, just powered, and that not just any powered character would be allowed to join, given that Johnson had to go through years of training on top of getting powers to join the team, and so similar rules would apply to other potential members.
In July 2015, Head of Marvel Television Jeph Loeb spoke on the real life parallels to the Inhumans that the series could explore, saying, "having someone on the team now being enhanced, how do people feel about that? What’s that like? What’s it like to be different? And again, I think that’s another metaphor that people really resonate to, whether it’s the color of your skin or your religion, or whether you’re gay. The modern-day world is becoming more and more accepting of those things, but it still doesn’t mean that there aren’t challenges to them. More importantly, how does the individual react to that? You could tell someone it’s going to get better, but that doesn’t mean it’s going to get better for them. When you get to take that and put it in Marvel terms, it’s, "OK, everything I touch turns to ice. How do I live in this world? And what’s going to happen to me? And do I want to live in this world?"
In September 2015, Tancharoen stated the overall theme for the season explored with each character was them "trying to get back in touch with their humanity in a world where Inhumans are popping up," with Whedon adding the nature of couples–some having broken up in previous episodes, some getting back together, and potential for new ones–would be explored. Later that month, Bell talked about some of the new character pairings in the season, saying "Putting Mack and Daisy together; putting Hunter and May together; putting Bobbi and Fitz together—suddenly you have all these different dynamics, all these different stories that you didn't have before. I think people will get a kick out of seeing those ... I think all the writers love writing scenes with characters in different combos, and I think the fans will really like watching those as well." Bell also explained that the series has the opportunity to explore the Inhumans outside of the Royal Family, who are the major focus of the comics. Tancharoen later highlighted the number of characters in the season compared to previous, stating that "There's more scale and scope, but at the same time, I think we're diving into each character's internal struggle a little bit more. You would be surprised that there's even room to do that, but somehow, there is."


=== CastingEdit ===
All principal cast members from the first and second seasons (Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson, Ming-Na Wen as Melinda May, Brett Dalton as Grant Ward, Chloe Bennet as Daisy Johnson [no longer going by her previous name of "Skye"], Iain De Caestecker as Leo Fitz, Elizabeth Henstridge as Jemma Simmons, Blood as Lance Hunter, and Palicki as Bobbi Morse) return for the third season. In May 2015, Bell said that the writers would look to incorporate Lincoln Campbell into the season, as he was a "nice addition" to the second season, and that they were looking forward to exploring Mack's character in new ways during the third season following his role in the second season finale. Luke Mitchell and Henry Simmons, who recurred as Lincoln and Mack, respectively, throughout the second season, were subsequently promoted to the principal cast for the third. Also returning from earlier in the series are Daz Crawford as Kebo, Peter MacNicol as Elliot Randolph, Blair Underwood as Andrew Garner, and Alicia Vela-Bailey as Alisha.
In July 2015, the Inhuman Lash, a villainous character from the comics, was confirmed to be appearing in the season, while Andrew Howard and Constance Zimmer were cast as Luther Banks and Rosalind Price, respectively, both recurring. In August 2015, Matthew Willig was revealed to be cast as Lash, while Juan Pablo Raba was announced as another new Inhuman, Joey Gutierrez. The next month, Powers Boothe was announced in the recurring role of Gideon Malick, the previously unnamed World Security Council member that he portrayed in The Avengers. In November 2015, Lash was revealed to be the Inhuman form of Garner, and Mark Dacascos was announced in the "heavily recurring" role of Giyera, the S.H.I.E.L.D. head of security. William Sadler also reprises his role from Iron Man 3 in the season, portraying President Matthew Ellis.


=== DesignEdit ===
Bennet cut her hair for the season, in order to further her character's transformation to Daisy Johnson, as she is portrayed in the comics. While not cutting her hair as short as her comic counterpart, Bennet stated, "The comic book version of Daisy Johnson has very short, Miley Cyrus-esque hair. We wanted to stay true to the comic book character fans love; I wanted to please them but also make sure there was still some movement and length and sexiness in the hair." Glenn Hetrick again worked with the make-up and visual effects departments to design and create the more "unique"-looking Inhumans, such as Lash, after having worked on Raina during season two. Willig's Lash make-up initially took 6 hours to apply, but the make-up team was able to reduce the time to 4.5 hours. Before a new Inhuman character can be introduced, the cost of creating their powers must be weighed, with Bell saying, "Can we afford to produce this effect? Because every time last year Gordon [teleported] we went, 'Wow, that was [expensive].' We want to do things we can do well, and that are visually interesting, and ideally serve as a metaphor somehow."
Bennet also received a new costume for the season, along with Quake's signature gauntlets, from series costume designer Ann Foley. On the costume, Foley said, "It's about strength. She feels very empowered in it.... That's what was important to me, that she felt empowered to me. I wanted to stay true to some of the designs I saw in the comics. In the style lines, I wanted to pay a little bit of a tribute to [Daisy's] tactical ability from last season, but we also incorporated the Quake symbol into her gauntlets and on the back of her suit." For the rest of the S.H.I.E.L.D. agents in the season, Foley made sure to reflect the fact that they've "graduated from the ragtag group of soldiers and scientists to the more precise militaristic outfit they always imagined they were." Legacy Effects created the costume's gauntlets and utility belt, making them "out of flexible materials painted to look like metal" so as not to injure anyone during stunts.
The season introduces a new title graphic for the series, replacing the one that appeared for the first two seasons, as well as a new aircraft for the team called Zephyr One, designed by series visual effects vendor FuseFX.


=== FilmingEdit ===
Production on the season began in late July 2015, in Culver City, California.


=== MusicEdit ===
With the season reinventing the series again, composer Bear McCreary expanded the sound of the score "in a big way". In addition to introducing new themes for the characters of Lash and Rosalind Price, McCreary made some changes to the orchestra: "To represent Lash, I brought in larger percussion: merciless pounding taikos that I digitally compressed and distorted. This new, mangled percussion sound is horrific, and will become increasingly important as the season progresses." McCreary also brought in trombones "to get the scariest sound possible," which resulted in the recording space being reconfigured when they were recorded. For Price, her scenes with Coulson "give the series the feeling of a dense political thriller...I really leaned into that, musically. I introduce light acoustic percussion, mostly egg shakers, to give the pulsing synths a softer edge. And I used an acoustic piano to play the "Rosalind Theme" at key moments in her scenes...her music is meant to add intrigue and suspicion, and simultaneously allow us to have some fun with their witty banter."


=== Marvel Cinematic Universe tie-insEdit ===
On the potential for crossover in the season with the rest of the MCU, Bell said in May 2015 that "I think [last] year worked really well — we got to be our own show and tell our own stories in the Marvel Cinematic Universe and do a nice hand off or a tie-in, but neither are incumbent upon the other to be a follow, and I think that’s a great model for us. Ant-Man comes out this summer and will have come and gone before we air again in September, so whether there’s anything vestigial from that or for [Captain America: Civil War] next season is to be determined. But we’re in contact with the movie people and them with us, and any time we can put little easter eggs in, it’s a lot of fun for die-hard fans." Bell also stated that there was a possibility of Hayley Atwell once again reprising her role as Peggy Carter in the season for an Agent Carter crossover.
In June 2015, it was revealed that the season would include the Secret Warriors team by introducing Inhuman characters inspired by the comic of the same name. On Daisy stepping up to be the leader of the Secret Warriors, Bell said, "Some people will be excited and some people will be a little intimidated or threatened by that. Any time a person grows or steps out of the role that they’re perceived to be a part of, it’s a problem. What happens when the student reaches the level of master or teacher? There’s a lot of good fodder for us... with that." On how this allows the series to tie-in with Civil War, Whedon stated that "we do have people across the globe who have powers on our show and there would be varying reactions to that. A lot of fear, some excitement, some people wanting to use it for good, some people wanting to use it for evil. So, a lot of those same themes [from the film] will be addressed on our show. How they tie in is a question mark for all involved, but we would definitely be dealing with some of those same themes."


== ReleaseEdit ==


=== BroadcastEdit ===
The season began airing in the United States on ABC on September 29, 2015, and is scheduled to run for 22 episodes. In Australia, the season aired on Fox8, rather than Channel 7 with previous seasons, with a two-week delay from the U.S. airings.


=== MarketingEdit ===
To promote the inclusion of the Secret Warriors in the season, at San Diego Comic-Con International 2015, Marvel gave fans a chance to be a part of the team, with ambassadors roaming the convention to find the most dedicated fans and rewarding them with limited edition “Secret Warriors” pins. Fans with pins were then asked to post a photo of themselves wearing the pin to social media, for cast members of the series to select their favorites. A premiere was held for the season on September 23, 2015, at Pacific Theatres at The Grove in Los Angeles, where the first episode was shown. In early October 2015, Marvel released a comedy video starring Dalton and Marvel Entertainment Chief Creative Officer Joe Quesada discussing a potential rebranding for Hydra, due to their image problem, which was conceived and written by Dalton. On October 9, 2015, "A Wanted (Inhu)man" was screened at New York Comic Con.


== ReceptionEdit ==


=== RatingsEdit ===


=== Critical responseEdit ===
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100% approval rating with an average rating of 8.2/10 based on 12 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Still evolving in its third season, Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. further hits its stride with a blend of thrills, humor, and heart." Based on the first episode, Merrill Barr of Forbes felt that the show "has grown up a lot since its first year, and with the start of season three, it’s hard to imagine what complaints any fans could possibly still have. If you want overall continuity, you got it. If you want people with super powers going crazy, it’s there. If you want an ensemble cast that brings the broadcast television corner of the MCU to life, then look no further. The point is, with the new season of S.H.I.E.L.D., it’s everything one could ask from the show." Writing for Vulture, Scott Meslow stated about the premiere that it's "riddled with [many] visual signifiers, highlighting the ways Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. has gradually become sharper, sleeker, and more reliant on the bones of its comic-book source material."


=== AccoladesEdit ===


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website
Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. at the Internet Movie Database
Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. at TV.com