Dualtone Records is an American-based independent record label specializing in folk, singer/songwriter, Americana and indie rock. It was founded in 2001 by Scott Robinson and Dan Herrington. The company is currently run by Robinson and the label's President, Paul Roper. The label's albums are distributed physically by the Alternative Distribution Alliance.
The independent label has been nominated for sixteen Grammy Awards, garnering four wins. Key releases include albums from The Lumineers, Brett Dennen, Shovels & Rope, Drew Holcomb & The Neighbors, June Carter Cash, Guy Clark, Matraca Berg, Bobby Bare, Charlie Robison and also offers a stellar line of vintage re-issues by Daniel Johnston, The Silos, The Reivers and Townes Van Zandt. Also in the catalog are tributes to Johnny Cash, Waylon Jennings and The Carter Family, which feature new recordings from artists such as Elvis Costello, Norah Jones, Sheryl Crow, Willie Nelson, Henry Rollins and Johnny Cash.
2011 releases by the label have debuted on USA Billboard 200 with Brett Dennen's "Loverboy" debuting at #54, Drew Holcomb & The Neighbors "Chasing Someday" at #156 and Guy Clark's "Songs and Stories" at #128. 2012 releases include The Lumineers, Shovels & Rope, Elenowen, Fort Atlantic, Little Comets & The Dirty Guv'nahs. The Lumineers album was certified platinum in the US on February 20, 2013. 2013 releases included Ivan & Alyosha's "All the Times We Had", and Little Comets's "Life is Elsewhere".
In 2014, Guy Clark's "My Favorite Picture of You" won the GRAMMY for Best Folk Album at the 56th Annual GRAMMY Awards. New releases for 2014 include Noah Gundersen's debut full length album "Ledges", which debuted at #100 on The Billboard Top 200, and Simone Felice's "Strangers". The Felice Brothers have also signed on to release their new album through Dualtone in 2014.
The label has also provided radio services for a select number of artists including The Civil Wars, Sugar & The Hi Lows and Lindsay Buckingham.


== List of Dualtone Records artists, current and catalog ==
Bobby Bare
Brett Dennen
Delta Spirit
The Felice Brothers
Fort Atlantic
Guy Clark
Ivan and Alyosha
June Carter Cash
Langhorne Slim
The Lumineers
Noah Gundersen
Shakey Graves
Shovels & Rope


== References ==