This is a list of episodes of anime produced for the Japanese series The Familiar of Zero. The series consists of four seasons, and the story follows characters from the second-year class of a magic academy, with the main one being an inept mage Louise and her familiar, a human from Earth, Saito Hiraga.
The first season, released in 2006, entitled The Familiar of Zero (ゼロの使い魔, Zero no Tsukaima), was produced by the Japanese animation studio J.C.Staff and directed by Yoshiaki Iwasaki. The series contained thirteen episodes which aired between July 3 and September 25 on a number of Japanese television networks, which include, but are not limited to Chiba TV and TV Kanagawa. In 2007, the second season, entitled Zero no Tsukaima: Futatsuki no Kishi (ゼロの使い魔 〜双月の騎士〜, lit. The Familiar of Zero: Knight of the Two Moons), had Yuu Kou as director. The series contained twelve episodes and aired in Japan between July 9 and September 24 on several Japanese television networks, such as Sun TV, TV Aichi, and TV Saitama. In 2008, the third season, titled Zero no Tsukaima: Princesse no Rondo (ゼロの使い魔 〜三美姫(プリンセッセ)の輪舞(ロンド), lit. The Familiar of Zero: Return of the Princess) was produced by the same team as the previous season; the series began July 6, 2008 and ended on September 21, 2008. Like the second season, it contained twelve episodes. A fourth and final season titled Zero no Tsukaima F aired between January 7, 2012 and March 24, 2012. It also contained twelve episodes.
Each season has two pieces of theme music: an opening theme and a closing theme. All opening themes are performed by Ichiko while all closing themes are performed by Rie Kugimiya, Louise's Japanese voice actress. Season one's episodes opened with "First Kiss" and ended with "The real feeling" (ホントノキモチ). Season two episodes started with "I Say Yes" and ended with "Suki!? Kirai!? Suki!!!" (スキ!? キライ!? スキ!!!), and season three episodes started with "You're the One" and ended with "Gomen" (literally "Sorry"). Season four episodes started with "I'll Be There For You" and ended with "Kiss Shite Agenai"
The first series was originally licensed for North America to Geneon Entertainment, who released the series directly to DVD on November 4, 2008. In 2012 and 2013 Sentai Filmworks licensed the first and fourth seasons of the series for North America. Sentai released the Geneon English language version of the first season on DVD and Blu-ray on April 8, 2014. All four seasons of the series have been released on DVD in Japan.


== The Familiar of Zero (2006)Edit ==


== The Familiar of Zero: Futatsuki no Kishi (2007)Edit ==


== The Familiar of Zero: Princess no Rondo (2008)Edit ==


== The Familiar of Zero: F (2012)Edit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website (Japanese)
J.C.Staff's The Familiar of Zero website (Japanese)
The Familiar of Zero (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia