"Whatever" (stylized as "WHATEVER") is a song by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki from her second studio album, Loveppears (1999). The song was released on a mini CD on 10 February 1999 and re-released on a compact disc on 28 February 2001 as the lead single from the album. "Whatever" was written by Hamasaki, produced by long-time collaborator Max Matsuura and arranged by Izumi Miyazaki, who is known under the alias DMX. Backed by synthesisers, violins and keyboards, it is a dance track that is written in third person narrative. "Whatever" received mixed reviews from music critics, some whom highlighted it as an album stand out while some criticized Hamasaki's "harsh" vocals.
Released in Japan and Taiwan, it peaked at number five on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart. This was Hamasaki's highest charting single at the time, until surpassed by the following single "Love (Destiny)". The song was certified gold by Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ). To promote "Whatever", Hamasaki performed the song on several Japanese television series. It has also been included on several tours and countdown live shows conducted by Hamasaki. Wataru Takeishi directed the song's music video, which features Hamasaki in a white room with small waterfalls features intercuts of a young boy in an angel costume.


== Background and composition ==
"Whatever" was written by Hamasaki, produced by long-time collaborator Max Matsuura and arranged by Izumi Miyazaki, who is known under the alias DMX. It was recorded in three version: a single version, an album version and an alternative version which appeared on the mini-CD format of the single. "Whatever" became Hamasaki's first single to have featured any English language, with the word "Wow", and English later progressed in her future tracks "Love: Since 1999" (May 1999) and "Audience" (November 2000). However, because "Audience" and "Whatever" featured only one-word phrases and "Love: Since 1999" was not written by Hamasaki, it does not count in using English–language conversation like she did in her 2002 album Rainbow. "Whatever" and several tracks from Loveppears were written in third person narrative and lyrically deal with themes of loneliness, chaos, confusion, and the burden of her responsibilities, aimed mostly towards her public image as an recording artist. The song is a dance song and begins with a gentle keyboard melody, transitioning to a heavy dance beat provided by synthesizers and violin.


== Release and promotion ==
"Whatever" was released on a mini CD on 10 February 1999 and re-released along with singles from Hamasaki's albums A Song for ×× (January 1999) and Loveppears on a compact disc on 28 February 2001. The first pressing was released in Taiwan by Avex Trax Taiwan, Hamasaki's first single to be released outside of Japan. In mid-1999, Avex Trax released an exclusive vinyl version, featuring an orange-tinted close-up of Hamasaki's face, and features two remixes of the single. The cover sleeve has Hamasaki in front of a blue backdrop with white clothes and wings on.
The music video opens with the title phrase "Ayumi Hamasaki: Whatever". It then it glitches to Hamasaki singing in white clothes in a room of waterfalls. Throughout the video, it features a girl with a white dread wig in an angel costume, as she walks curious in an abandoned and destroyed town, looking for any sign of life. At the end, it shows Hamasaki in a similar white wig with a tear in her eye, as she is trapped in a cage with barbed wire.


== Reception ==
A reviewer from Geocities.jp had awarded the parent album four stars out of five, and commended the songs "very high quality" and "innovative music." However, they did criticize Hamasaki's "thin" and "harsh" vocal delivery. Morimasa from Nifty.com highlighted "Whatever", "Love (Destiny)" and the EP single A from Loveppears as the album stand outs. He commented that despite the "easily" written lyrics, he commended Hamasaki's emotional delivery in both the production and the lyrical content, selecting it as an album stand out. The song was among all tracks on A Complete: All Singles that were commended for its remastering quality, which was reviewed by a staff member of HMV.
In Japan, the 8 cm format reached number five on the Oricon Singles Chart and stayed in the chart for nine weeks. It was Hamasaki's highest charting single on Oricon, beating her 1998 single "Depend on You" which peaked at six. In 2001, the re-release CD single format reached number twenty-eight and stayed in there for three weeks, tallying the charting weeks to twelve. "Whatever" was certified gold in April 1999 by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for shipments of 200,000 units. "Whatever" is her thirty-fifth and fifty-seventh best selling single in Japan, her lowest in both the Loveppears and format re-release era respectively.


== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from the singles's liner notes.


== Track listing ==
8 cm single;(February 20, 1999)
"Whatever" (version M) – 5:33
"Whatever" (version J) – 4:30
"Whatever" (version M – instrumental) – 5:33
"Whatever" (version J – instrumental) – 4:30
Re-release 12 cm single(February 28, 2001)
"Whatever" (version M) – 5:33
"Whatever" (version J) – 4:30
"Whatever" (Ferry 'System F' Corsten vocal extended mix) – 6:31
"Appears" (JP's SoundFactory mix) – 8:00
"Immature" (D-Z Dual Lucifer mix) – 4:36
"Whatever" (version M – instrumental) – 5:33
"Whatever" (version J – instrumental) – 4:30


== Charts and certifications ==