Solar power use in United Kingdom although relatively unknown in the UK until recently, has increased very rapidly in recent years, albeit from a small base, as a result of reductions in the cost of photovoltaic (PV) panels, and the introduction of a feed-in tariff (FIT) subsidy in April 2010. In 2014, the almost 650,000 solar installations had a total capacity of over 5,000 MW of solar power. The largest solar farm in the UK is the 48 MW Southwick Estate solar farm, near Fareham, finished in March 2015. In 2012, the government had said that 4 million homes across the UK will be powered by the sun within eight years, representing 22,000 MW of installed solar power capacity by 2020.


== History ==
In 2006, the United Kingdom had installed about 12 megawatts (MW) of photovoltaic capacity and represented only 0.3% of total European solar PV of 3,400 MW. At the end of 2011, there were 230,000 solar power projects in the United Kingdom, with a total installed generating capacity of 750 MW. By February 2012 the installed capacity had reached 1,000 MW.
Due to an EU agreement to generate 15% of electricity from renewables by 2020, in June 2008 a new programme to encourage homeowners to generate their own electricity was announced, which also included a feed-in tariff.


== Solar resource ==
The UK's annual insolation is in the range of 750–1,100 kilowatt-hours per square metre (kWh/m²). London receives 0.52 and 4.74 kWh/m² per day in December and July, respectively. While the sunniest parts of the UK receive much less solar radiation than the sunniest parts of Europe, the country's insolation in the south is comparable with that of central European countries, including Germany, which generates about 7% of its electricity from solar power. Additionally, the UK's higher wind speeds cool PV modules, leading to higher efficiencies than could be expected at these levels of insolation. The Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) assumes an average capacity factor of 9.7% for solar photovoltaics in the UK.
A 1,000 km2 (390 sq mi), 200,000 MW solar farm in Scotland, where the insolation is about 900 kWh/m²/yr would provide 180,000 GWh per year, equal to all of Scotland's energy demand. Since most of that would be in the summer, when Scotland receives 12–14 hours of sun, the excess would need to be stored or exported, and wind, hydro-electric, nuclear and carbon based energy would need to be used in the winter. About 47% of energy in Scotland is used for heat, and can be substantially reduced by increasing insulation of buildings.


== PV commercialisation ==
In August 2006 there was widespread news coverage in the United Kingdom of the major high street electrical retailers (Currys) decision to stock PV modules, manufactured by Sharp, at a cost of £1,000 per module. The retailer also provides an installation service.
The introduction of the Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) in 2010 saw rapid growth of the UK photovoltaic market, with many thousands of domestic installations along with numerous commercial, community and industrial projects. On 13 July 2011, construction of the largest solar park in the United Kingdom was completed in Newark-on-Trent in Nottinghamshire. The 4.9 MW free-field system was built just in seven weeks after being granted planning permission. The system will generate an estimated 4,860 MW·h of electricity (an average power of 560 kW) into the national grid each year. There are several other examples of 4–5 MW field arrays of photovoltaics in the UK, including the 5 MW Langage Solar Park, the 5 MW Westmill Solar Farm, the 4.51 MW Marsten Solar Farm and Toyota's 4.6 MW plant in Burnaston, Derbyshire. The cuts to the feed in tariff made in the fast track review announced by DECC on 9 June 2011 mean that large arrays of solar photovoltaics are now a much less attractive investment opportunity for developers (especially for projects greater than 250 kW), so large field arrays such as these are unlikely to be built beyond the 1 August 2011 cut off date, at least not until 2012, when PV prices reduce somewhat - a utility scale solar farm is paid 8.9 p/kWhr generated.
Sharp Solar, has a facility in Llay near Wrexham.
G42i is building (2007) the world's first commercial scale dye sensitized TiO2 module plant.
Solar Century offers BIPV modules to fit with standard UK concrete tiles.
The first solar park in Wales came on stream in 2011 at Rhosygilwen, north Pembrokeshire. As of June 2014 there were 18 schemes generating more than 5 MW and 34 in planning or construction.
Solar power use has increased very rapidly in recent years, albeit from a small base, as a result of reductions in the cost of photovoltaic (PV) panels, and the introduction of a Feed-in tariff (FIT) subsidy in April 2010. At the end of 2011, there were 230,000 solar power projects in the United Kingdom, with a total installed generating capacity of 750 megawatts (MW). By February 2012 the installed capacity had reached 1,000 MW. In 2012, the government said that 4 million homes across the UK will be powered by the sun within eight years. The government expects Britain to have 22 gigawatts of installed solar power capacity by 2020.
The first large solar farm in the United Kingdom, a 32 MW solar farm, began construction in November 2012. It is located in Leicestershire, and is expected to be completed before April 2013, when the feed in tariff for large systems will be reduced. It is located between the runways of the former military airfield, Wymeswold.
At the end of September 2013, IKEA announced that solar panel packages for houses will be sold at 17 United Kingdom IKEA stores by the end of July 2014. The decision followed a successful pilot project at the Lakeside IKEA store, whereby one photovoltaic (PV) system was sold almost every day. The panels are manufactured by the Chinese company Hanergy.


== Government programmes ==
The Energy Saving Trust that administers government grants for domestic photovoltaic systems, the Low Carbon Building Programme, estimates that an installation for an average-sized house would cost between £5,000–£8,000, with most domestic systems usually between 1.5 and 3 kWp, and yield annual savings between £150 and £200.
The Green Energy for Schools programme will be providing 100 schools across the UK with solar panels. The first school in Wales was the Tavernspite School, near Whitland, which has received panels worth £20,000, sufficient to produce 3,000 kW·h of electricity each year.


=== Feed-in tariff ===
Discussion on implementation of a feed-in tariff programme concluded on 26 September 2008, and the results were published in 2009. One story used the language "They will be able to sell back surplus electricity at premium prices to the national grid.", which is not a feed-in tariff, it is simply a means of reconciling any surplus from a net metering programme. The key word is "surplus", not the word "sell". Net metering only requires the existing home electric meter, while a feed in tariff requires installation of a separate meter to measure generation. Australia has been criticised for implementing a similar programme, paying A$0.60 (about £0.28) for each kWh over what is used each month, with Environment Victoria Campaigns Director Mark Wakeham calling it a "fake feed-in tariff". The current FIT is a compromise - for systems less than 4 kW all electricity generated is purchased by the electric company for 16p/kWh and then sold back to the consumer for free, who can in turn sell back any electricity not consumed at 3.1p/kWh. This requires two meters. A far simpler system is to eliminate the FIT, allow full net metering, and buy any net electricity not consumed each year at the same rate it is sold. As of March 2012 suppliers are advertising an 8% to 10% return on your investment, and a break even point of 8 to 12 years.
The government in the UK agreed in April 2010 to pay for all grid-connected generated electricity at an initial rate of up to 41.3p (US$0.67) per kWh, whether used locally or exported. The rates proved more attractive than necessary, and in August 2011, were drastically reduced for installations over 50 kW, a policy change criticized as marking "the end of the UK’s solar industry as we know it". Feed In Tariff rates are reviewed every three months by the government and new rates are set based on how many installations there had been within the period. As of 1 April 2015, the rate is 13.39 pence per kWh of power generated for domestic systems of 4kWp (p means peak i.e. the maximum power that the system can produce) or less and where homes meet the minimum EPC requirement of band D. From 1 October 2015 the rate is 12.47 pence per kWh pence for domestic systems of 4 kW or less. It is proposed that from 1 January 2016 the rate will be 1.63 pence per kWh a drop of 87% in the subsidy. The Export Tariff will remain at 4.85 pence per kWh exported to the grid. The amount of electricity exported is not usually measured. It is calculated by assuming that 50% of the electricity produced is exported into the grid.
George Monbiot, an environmentalist seeking to replace fossil fuels with carbon-free sources of energy, opposes subsidies for solar power within the UK, "because the facts show unequivocally that this is a terrible investment." On the other hand, Derry Newman, chief executive of Solarcentury, argues that the UK's "famously overcast weather does not make it an unsuitable place for solar power, as solar panels work on daylight, not necessarily direct sunlight." Some solar cells work better in direct sunlight, others can use more diffuse light. While insolation rates are lower in England than France and Spain, they are still usable. Many of the solar panels can be monitored on the internet, such as the Slepe Farm in Dorset, a 492 kW solar field.


=== Net metering ===
Net metering is only available from one company, Eastern Energy, where it is referred to as "SolarNet".


== Statistics ==

Solar power numbers can only be an estimate due to the nature of how home or business owned PV systems operate within the overall grid in the UK. Essentially the power generated then used by equipment onsite will never reach the grid so can never be directly calculated by government statistics. Given this there will still be indirect estimates possible both in terms of the lowering of demand from the grid, a phenomena well seen in Australia for example, or by estimating how much electric is used by UK homes on average. There are few studies or estimates on the use of home or business generated electricity by either solar or wind so as to give an indication of the real generation of such technologies.
The below table shows electricity production from solar panels as a percentage of the final consumption of electricity in the UK and not gross supply to the grid.


=== PV installations by region ===


== See also ==

Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom
Energy policy of the United Kingdom
Green electricity in the United Kingdom
Solar power in the European Union
UK-ISES
United Kingdom National Renewable Energy Action Plan


== References ==


== External links ==
UK's First Solar Plant Gets Go-ahead: A disused tin mine is set to host the UK's first solar panel park after winning approval from Cornwall Council.
Energy statistics from DECC
Feed-in Tariff Installation Report
A history of UK solar photovoltaics - Solar Panels Infographic
Solar Panels Facts - Facts Section
Facts for Solar Energy and Solar Power - Faq