The following are links to lists of United States cities with large ethnic minority populations. (There are many cities in the US with no ethnic majority.)


== African Americans ==
List of U.S. cities with large African American populations
List of U.S. cities with African American majority populations
List of U.S. cities with large Nigerian American populations

List of U.S. cities with large West Indian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Jamaican American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Trinidadian and Tobagonian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Haitian American populations


== Asian Americans ==
List of U.S. communities with Asian American majority populations
List of U.S. cities with large Cambodian-American populations
List of U.S. cities with significant Chinese American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Filipino American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Japanese American populations
List of U.S. cities with significant Korean American populations
List of U.S. cities with large South Asian/Indian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Thai American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Vietnamese American populations


== European Americans ==
List of U.S. cities with large European American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Armenian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Austrian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Czech American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Danish American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Dutch American populations
List of U.S. cities with large English American populations
List of U.S. cities with large French American populations
List of U.S. cities with large German American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Greek American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Hungarian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Irish American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Italian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Norwegian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Polish American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Portuguese American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Romanian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Russian American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Spanish American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Swiss American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Turkish American populations


== Hispanic/Latin Americans ==
List of U.S. communities with Hispanic majority populations
List of U.S. cities with large Cuban American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Dominican American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Guatemalan American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Puerto Rican populations
List of U.S. cities with large Mexican American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Salvadorian American populations

List of U.S. cities with large Brazilian American populations


== Jewish Americans ==
List of U.S. cities with large American Jewish populations


== Middle Eastern Americans ==
List of U.S. cities with large Arab American populations
List of U.S. cities with large Iranian American populations


== Native Americans ==
List of U.S. communities with Native American majority populations


== See also ==
Lists of UK locations with large ethnic minority populations