Substrata is an ambient music album by Biosphere, released in 1997 by All Saints Records. It is considered to be a classic ambient album, consistently in the top 5 in surveys on the Hyperreal ambient mailing list.
Being Biosphere's first truly ambient album, it has a theme of cold, of mountains and glaciers and running water. Sounds of howling wind and creaking wood, although infrequently employed, create a chilling soundscape interrupted by sonorous but quietly suspenseful music.
In 2001 the album was re-released in a digitally remastered format with a second disc featuring a soundtrack for Dziga Vertov's 1929 film Man with a Movie Camera. See Substrata 2.


== Track listingEdit ==
"As the Sun Kissed the Horizon" – 1:47
"Poa Alpina" – 4:10
"Chukhung" – 7:34
"The Things I Tell You" – 6:28
"Times When I Know You'll Be Sad" – 3:44
"Hyperborea" – 5:45
"Kobresia" – 7:12
"Antennaria" – 5:05
"Uva-Ursi" – 3:00
"Sphere of No-Form" – 5:47
"Silence" – 7:54


== SamplesEdit ==
Track 4: The Things I Tell You - speech from Twin Peaks (Season 2, Episode 1) spoken by The Giant on his second visitation to Agent Cooper:

"Sorry to wake you. [...] I forgot to tell you something. [...] The things I tell you will not be wrong."

Track 6: Hyperborea - speech from Twin Peaks (same episode) from the scene where Major Briggs explains his vision to his son, Bobby:

"This was a vision, fresh and clear as a mountain stream, the mind revealing itself to itself. In my vision, I was on the veranda of a vast estate, a palazzo of some fantastic proportion. There seemed to emanate from it a light from within, this gleaming, radiant marble. I'd known this place. I had in fact been born and raised there. This was my first return. A reunion with the deepest well-springs of my being. Wandering about, I noticed happily that the house had been immaculately maintained. There'd been added a number of additional rooms, but in a way that blended so seamlessly with the original construction, one would never detect any difference. Returning to the house's grand foyer, there came a knock at the door. My son was standing there. He was happy and carefree, clearly living a life of deep harmony and joy. We embraced, a warm and loving embrace, nothing withheld. We were, in this moment, one. My vision ended and I awoke with a tremendous feeling of optimism and confidence in you and your future. That was my vision of you. I'm so glad to have had this opportunity to share it with you. I wish you nothing but the very best in all things."

Track 7: Kobresia - "Это либо металл, либо... Если металл, то крашенный... холодная поверхность... " speech in Russian sampled from a documentary recording about Russian telepathic Karl Nikolaev who's sitting in a room trying to guess which item is lying on a table situated in a room two stages above him. This sample is taken from a Moscow radio broadcast translation. Near translation into English is:

"This is either a metal, or... if it is a metal, then it's painted... cold surface... This is either a metal, painted, or could be a plastic... Colorful, there are... Bright... Seems like... is this a toy, probably? The surface is smooth, but... there are some bumps on it... Even the finger stucks in it... Probably it is... some marks, or is this a letters?... Or just a bumps... Looks like a toy... Colorful metal, or a plastic... painted metal... That's all.. Stop."


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Substrata on Discogs