Doohoma, (Irish: Dumhaigh Thuama meaning "the sounding sandy banks") is named after the sound of the Atlantic breakers crashing on the shore. Doohoma is situated on the north-west coast of Kiltane parish, Erris, County Mayo and is a peninsula on the Atlantic coastline. Its area consists of 1,102 acres (4.46 km2), none of it any distance from its beautiful coastline without crowds or pollution. It is situated approximately fifteen miles (24 km) south west of the village of Bangor Erris. It overlooks Achill Island and the Mullet Peninsula. It is a picturesque village with panoramic sea views across Blacksod Bay. Its long sandy beaches and safe bays are perfect for watersports such as surfing, kiting, sailing, swimming, fishing, boating and wind surfing.
Doohoma is the central village and collective name for a further six villages, which include Doohoma Head (Cean Romhar), Crook na Mona, Bunnafully, Tallaghan, Roy Carter and Roy Bingham. There are two pubs, The Sea Rod Inn (Barrett's) and Tra Bui (Holmes's), a post office and two grocery stores. There are two strong community focal points in Doohoma, namely the local Roman Catholic church (Pope Pius X) and the Doohoma National School. As well as educating the local children, the National School also supplies the Kiltane Gaelic Football Club with players. There is also an 18 hole golf course.
The town-land was the theme of the RTÉ documentary 'Doohoma'which dealt with the theme of emigration to England and the effect on local families. In recent years, however, a number of first and second-generation natives have returned to take advantage of the improving economic climate.  


== History ==
Like many other parts of County Mayo, Doohoma was devastated during the famine years of the mid-1840s. The population of 455 people in 1841 was more than halved to 218 people by 1851. It has endured high levels of emigration throughout the years, with the diaspora of Doohoma spreading across the world to such countries as England, Scotland, USA, Australia and Canada. Despite the geographical distance, these emigrants have kept strong links with the area. The first main road through the townland was not built until 1847.
After the famine, mass burials took place on the sandbanks and, despite repeated requests by local people grew louder for a proper cemetery, a request repeatedly rejected by the civil authorities. Eventually, in 1926 three hundred local men erected a sod wall, which was later consecrated by Bishop James Naughton. Eventually Mayo County Council granted some money to erect a stone wall to replace the sod ditch. Later local residents were unsuccessful in their endeavours to get a road built from the sandbanks to the cemetery, so in 1967 over 100 volunteers built a road to improve access. In 1989 the Council tarred the road for the first time.
Doohoma had a long history of emigration. Fishing was the main occupation of the community but was never able to sustain the growing population entirely so every year in June whole families would go to the potato fields of Scotland. These workers were known as "tattie hokers". There were so many went from Doohoma that ships would moor off Doohoma Head to transport them to the potato fields of Scotland.
The first National School was established in Doohoma in 1859 just outside the boundary of the Tallaghanbawn townland and the first church in the townland was built close by later.
A new industry was opened in the early 1970s - Eagle Isle Seafoods founded in 1972 exports smoked wild Atlantic salmon all over the world.
In 1987, Mayo County Council financed a two million pound water scheme. This brought piped water from Carrowmorw Lake, a much needed boost to the local infrastructure.
In the past, the village survived primarily on small farming and fishing communities, but in recent years the occupations of the residents vary.


== Sports ==
Doohoma has a football tradition.
Doohoma Golf Course is a 9-hole, par-3 course overlooking the Atlantic. Most holes are 130 yards, though a few go to 160+ yards. There is a second set of 9 tee boxes set up to make a full 18-hole course, though they use the same greens as the first 9 holes. All holes have a view of the sea and none are more than a few hundred yards from the beach. The holes form a horseshoe shape around the Doohoma football pitch. Hazards include sand traps and rough grass, no trees or water hazards. A practice green is available. Payment is through an honesty box in the porta-cabin located on the premises. No facilities exist on the premises, but the course is located a short walk from The Sea Rod public house, which has refreshments (bar food and drinks), a small shop, and restrooms for patrons. As this course is directly facing the Atlantic, the weather can be windy and rainy even when the weather further inland seems fine; dress appropriately.
It also has produced some boxers.


== References ==
^ "The Sea Rod Inn - About". Thesearodinn.ie. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ [1]
^ 22 June 2007 (2007-06-22). "The TD, the developer and the holiday haven". Independent.ie. Retrieved 2013-06-08. 
^ Noone, Fr. Sean. Where the Sun Sets (1991) Naas


== See also ==
List of towns and villages in Ireland