Manufacturing is the production of merchandise for use or sale using labour and machines, tools, chemical and biological processing, or formulation. The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale. Such finished goods may be used for manufacturing other, more complex products, such as aircraft, household appliances or automobiles, or sold to wholesalers, who in turn sell them to retailers, who then sell them to end users – the "consumers".
Manufacturing takes turns under all types of economic systems. In a free market economy, manufacturing is usually directed toward the mass production of products for sale to consumers at a profit. In a collectivist economy, manufacturing is more frequently directed by the state to supply a centrally planned economy. In mixed market economies, manufacturing occurs under some degree of government regulation.
Modern manufacturing includes all intermediate processes required for the production and integration of a product's components. Some industries, such as semiconductor and steel manufacturers use the term fabrication instead.
The manufacturing sector is closely connected with engineering and industrial design. Examples of major manufacturers in North America include General Motors Corporation, General Electric, Procter & Gamble, General Dynamics, Boeing, Pfizer, and Precision Castparts. Examples in Europe include Volkswagen Group, Siemens, and Michelin. Examples in Asia include Sony, Huawei, Lenovo, Toyota, Samsung, and Bridgestone.


== History and developmentEdit ==

In its earliest form, manufacturing was usually carried out by a single skilled artisan with assistants. Training was by apprenticeship. In much of the pre-industrial world, the guild system protected the privileges and trade secrets of urban artisans.
Before the Industrial Revolution, most manufacturing occurred in rural areas, where household-based manufacturing served as a supplemental subsistence strategy to agriculture (and continues to do so in places). Entrepreneurs organized a number of manufacturing households into a single enterprise through the putting-out system.
Toll manufacturing is an arrangement whereby a first firm with specialized equipment processes raw materials or semi-finished goods for a second firm.


=== Manufacturing systems: changes in methods of manufacturingEdit ===
Craft or guild system
Agile manufacturing
American system of manufacturing
English system of manufacturing
Fabrication
Flexible manufacturing
Just-in-time manufacturing
Lean manufacturing
Mass customization (2000s) - 3D printing, design-your-own web sites for sneakers, clothing
Mass production
Ownership
Packaging and labeling
Prefabrication
Putting-out system
Rapid manufacturing
Reconfigurable manufacturing system
Soviet collectivism in manufacturing


== Industrial policyEdit ==


=== Economics of manufacturingEdit ===
According to some economists, manufacturing is a wealth-producing sector of an economy, whereas a service sector tends to be wealth-consuming. Emerging technologies have provided some new growth in advanced manufacturing employment opportunities in the Manufacturing Belt in the United States. Manufacturing provides important material support for national infrastructure and for national defense.
On the other hand, most manufacturing may involve significant social and environmental costs. The clean-up costs of hazardous waste, for example, may outweigh the benefits of a product that creates it. Hazardous materials may expose workers to health risks. These costs are now well known and there is effort to address them by improving efficiency, reducing waste, using industrial symbiosis, and eliminating harmful chemicals. The increased use of technologies such as 3D printing also offer the potential to reduce the environmental impact of producing finished goods through distributed manufacturing.
The negative costs of manufacturing can also be addressed legally. Developed countries regulate manufacturing activity with labor laws and environmental laws. Across the globe, manufacturers can be subject to regulations and pollution taxes to offset the environmental costs of manufacturing activities. Labor unions and craft guilds have played a historic role in the negotiation of worker rights and wages. Environment laws and labor protections that are available in developed nations may not be available in the third world. Tort law and product liability impose additional costs on manufacturing. These are significant dynamics in the ongoing process, occurring over the last few decades, of manufacture-based industries relocating operations to "developing-world" economies where the costs of production are significantly lower than in "developed-world" economies.


=== Manufacturing and investmentEdit ===

Surveys and analyses of trends and issues in manufacturing and investment around the world focus on such things as:
the nature and sources of the considerable variations that occur cross-nationally in levels of manufacturing and wider industrial-economic growth;
competitiveness; and
attractiveness to foreign direct.
In addition to general overviews, researchers have examined the features and factors affecting particular key aspects of manufacturing development. They have compared production and investment in a range of Western and non-Western countries and presented case studies of growth and performance in important individual industries and market-economic sectors.
On June 26, 2009, Jeff Immelt, the CEO of General Electric, called for the United States to increase its manufacturing base employment to 20% of the workforce, commenting that the U.S. has outsourced too much in some areas and can no longer rely on the financial sector and consumer spending to drive demand. Further, while U.S. manufacturing performs well compared to the rest of the U.S. economy, research shows that it performs poorly compared to manufacturing in other high-wage countries. A total of 3.2 million – one in six U.S. manufacturing jobs – have disappeared between 2000 and 2007. In the UK, EEF the manufacturers organisation has led calls for the UK economy to be rebalanced to rely less on financial services and has actively promoted the manufacturing agenda.


== Countries by manufacturing output using the most recent known dataEdit ==
Data is provided by Worldbank. It shows the total value of manufacturing in US dollars for its noted year.


== Manufacturing processesEdit ==
List of manufacturing processes
Manufacturing Process Management


== TheoriesEdit ==
Taylorism/Scientific management
Fordism


== ControlEdit ==
Management
List of management topics
Total Quality Management

Quality control
Six Sigma


== See alsoEdit ==

List of largest manufacturing companies by revenue
Industrial robot
Advanced manufacturing
Metal fabrication
Microfabrication
Optics fabrication
Semiconductor device fabrication


== ReferencesEdit ==


== SourcesEdit ==
Kalpakjian, Serope; Steven Schmid (August 2005). Manufacturing, Engineering & Technology. Prentice Hall. pp. 22–36, 951–988. ISBN 0-13-148965-8. 


== External linksEdit ==
Cato Institute article: Thriving in a Global Economy: The Truth about U.S. Manufacturing and Trade
How Everyday Things Are Made: video presentations.Alina
Time magazine article on American manufacturing's global effectiveness
Grant Thornton IBR 2008 Manufacturing industry focus
MFGWatch - Quarterly Survey of North American Manufacturers
EEF, the manufacturers' organisation - industry group representing uk manufacturers
Industry Today - Industrial and Manufacturing Methodologies