The Heleophrynidae are a family of order Anura, commonly known as ghost frogs. The family consists of a two genera, Heleophryne and Hadromophryne, with seven species. Ghost frogs live in swift-moving mountain streams in South Africa. The common name of "ghost frogs" may have been coined because of their occurrence in Skeleton Gorge.


== Biology ==
Ghost frogs have morphological adaptation suited to surviving on the rocks around these streams. They are medium-sized frogs, reaching a length of 6 cm (2.4 in), with flat bodies, enabling them to climb inside rocky crevices. They have very large toe discs in comparison to their size, which helps to cling onto rocks. The mouthparts of the tadpoles are modified into sucking discs, to allow them to cling to substrates, and remain still while they are feeding.


== Taxonomy ==
The ghost frogs are closely related to the Sooglossidae family, which inhabit the Seychelles. They may also be closely related to the Australian Myobatrachidae.
Family Heleophrynidae
Genus Hadromophryne Van Dijk, 2008
Natal ghost frog, Hadromophryne natalensis Hewitt, 1913

Genus Heleophryne Sclater, 1898
Cederberg ghost frog, Heleophryne depressa FitzSimons, 1946
Hewitt's ghost frog, Heleophryne hewitti Boycott, 1988
Eastern ghost frog, Heleophryne orientalis FitzSimons, 1946
Purcell's ghost frog, Heleophryne purcelli Sclater, 1898
Royal ghost frog, Heleophryne regis Hewitt, 1910
Rose's ghost frog, Heleophryne rosei Hewitt, 1925


== EDGE endangered species ==
On January 21, 2008, Evolutionarily Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) identified nature's most "weird, wonderful and endangered species", stating that "the EDGE amphibians are amongst the most remarkable and unusual species on the planet and yet an alarming 85% of the top 100 are receiving little or no conservation attention." Their top ten species included the ghost frogs.


== References ==

Cogger, H.G.; R.G. Zweifel; D. Kirschner (2004). Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians Second Edition. Fog City Press. ISBN 1-877019-69-0.