There are a large number of sports that involve water. The following is a list of water sports, divided by category. These categories are based on the relation of the sports to the water. Some of the sports include only one part related to swimming, such as a triathlon.


== In the water ==
Swimming, including pool swimming and open water swimming
Diving off springboards or off platforms
Modern pentathlon includes épée fencing, pistol shooting, swimming, a show jumping course on horseback, and cross country running
Rescue swimming is swimming with the goal to rescue other swimmers or the practice thereof.
Snorkeling is the practice of swimming at the surface (typically of the sea) being equipped with a mask, fins, and a short tube called a snorkel.
Synchronized diving
Synchronized swimming is a hybrid of swimming, gymnastics, and ballet.
Triathlon, a multi-sport event involving the completion of three continuous and sequential endurance events, usually a combination of swimming, cycling and running
Waboba is played with a waboba ball on beaches or in pools.
Water aerobics is aerobics in the water.
Water polo is a team sport played in water.
Aquajogging


== On the water ==

Barefoot skiing is waterskiing without skis
Boating is the use of boats
Boat racing is the use of powerboats to participate in races
Bodyboarding is similar to surfing, but the board is smaller and the person (normally) lies down on the board
Cable skiing is similar to wake boarding but with cables for artificial maneuvering
Canoeing
Canoe polo
Dragon Boat Racing teams of 20 paddlers racing
Fishing is the recreation and sport of catching fish
Flyboard
Flowriding
Jet Skiing
Kayaking
Kiteboating
Kitesurfing on flat water using a kite for propulsion
Kneeboarding
Parasailing where a person is towed behind a vehicle (usually a boat) while attached to a parachute
Picigin, kicking around a small ball on shallow waters.
Rafting
Rowing
Sailing using the wind for propulsion
Sit-down hydrofoiling is riding on the water with a hydrofoil attached to a ski
Skimboarding is a boardsport in which a board is used to ride on an incoming wave
Skurfing is where the participant "skurfs" behind a boat on a surfboard
Stand up paddle surfing a surf style board with a paddle, used in flatwater or waves
Surfing downhill on ocean waves or artificial waves in a wave pool
Wakeboarding is similar to water skiing, but using only one board attached to the feet
Wakeskating is similar to wakeboarding, but the board is not attached to the feet
Wakesurfing is a mix between wakeboarding and surfing
Waterskiing is using skis to slide over the water while being pulled by a boat or other device
White water rafting
Windsurfing on flat water using wind for propulsion in combination with sails
Yachting sailing on yachts, daysailing, cruising or Yacht racing


== Under water ==


=== Recreational diving ===

cave diving
deep diving
Free-diving
ice diving
spearfishing
Underwater archaeology, particularly activity involving wreck diving
Underwater photography, including underwater videography, is photography done under water. Numerous contests worldwide are arranged every year. Digital cameras have revolutionized how many divers participate.
Underwater videography


=== Underwater sports ===

Aquathlon (underwater wrestling)
Finswimming
Free-diving
Sport diving (sport)
Spearfishing
Underwater football
Underwater hockey is a game played underwater which has with some similarities to hockey. Two teams of players use short wooden curved sticks to move a heavy puck across the pool bottom to the opponents' goal.
Underwater ice hockey
Underwater orienteering
Underwater photography (sport)
Underwater rugby is a game played underwater which has some similarities to rugby football. Two teams try to score goals by sending a slightly negatively buoyant ball into the opponents' goal placed on the bottom of the pool.
Underwater target shooting


== See also ==

Outdoor recreation
Outline of canoeing and kayaking


== References ==
Water Sports Dictionaries