Some Bizzare [sic] Records is a British independent record label owned by Stevo Pearce. The label was founded in 1981, with the release of Some Bizzare Album, a compilation of unsigned bands including Depeche Mode, Soft Cell, The The, Neu Electrikk and Blancmange.


== History ==


=== 1981-1989 ===
One of the first bands that Some Bizzare worked with was B-Movie. After working with B-Movie the label achieved notable success with Soft Cell, an electronic duo whose Mutant Moments EP Stevo Pearce had championed in Sounds. After Soft Cell Signed to Some Bizzare Label he went on to manage Soft Cell, under a deal with Some Bizzare Phonogram their cover of "Tainted Love" topped the charts.
In the early eighties Stevo Pearce gained a reputation for being a maverick. He licensed The The's Soul Mining album to three different record labels. After delivering the album to Phonogram he then took it from them and sold it to Warner Bros. Records, then sold it on again to Columbia Records CBS. The one recording was sold to three companies, each time signed off by the companies mentioned for the best deal. Soul Mining was eventually released in 1983. The The released further albums with Some Bizzare, including Infected in 1986. Matt Johnson from The The also recorded with Some Bizzare act Marc and the Mambas.
Later acts on the record label's roster included Cabaret Voltaire, Psychic TV, Test Department, Einstürzende Neubauten, Coil, Swans, Scraping Foetus Off The Wheel. Many of these bands were included on the label's 1985 compilation album If You Can't Please Yourself, You Can't Please Your Soul.


=== 1990 – present ===
Some Bizzare built a reputation for madcap behavior. For example, during the nineties Stevo Pearce's offices, based in Mayfair, included a private chapel and confession box for would-be-signings to go through the solemn hand-over of demo tapes. Stevo was also partial to aggressively insulting young record shop employees at this time should they be unfortunate enough to be working in a shop that sold Coil's recordings. The recordings that they made money from at that period in time. 2001 saw Stevo Pearce compile a new compilation album titled I'd Rather Shout at a Returning Echo than Kid Someone's Listening. It included the Soft Cell track "God Shaped Hole", recorded by the newly reformed band. The compilation also saw the inclusion of two tracks recorded by Cabaret Voltaire's Richard H. Kirk. Between 2001 and 2005 Some Bizzare's output was minimal.
In 2006 Some Bizzare signed acts The Dark Poets, Monkey Farm Frankenstein, Meka and Mainstream Distortion. The compilation album Redefining the Prologue was released on October 2006 to mark the label's 25th anniversary provides an overview of the label's output. This album coincided with a Some Bizzare exhibition at the Horse Hospital arts venue in Bloomsbury, London. The exhibition included original artwork from bands like The The and Marc and the Mambas.
2007 saw Some Bizzare Records sign some new acts including Pedro INF a Portuguese dance music producer and UK artist Kontour, releasing the album Scanners. These new artists were featured on the Some Bizzare Double Album compilation released in 2008. The album featured 32 new artists discovered on MySpace. Other acts included Risqué, who were a French / Welsh electronic group made up of Nathalie and Huw Williams. Their music consisted of robust driving rhythms and ethereal vocals. They record their music in a studio based in Barcelona. Huw Williams is a well established producer working with bands like "Rubikon" and "Rookie". The album Tie Me Up, Tie Me Down was released by Some Bizzare in August 2009.
In 2010 The album of Satanicpornocultshop Arkhaiomelisidonophunikheratos was released by Some Bizzare in May.


== Some Bizzare artists ==
The The
Marc Almond
Marc and the Mambas
FM Einheit
Foetus
Test Dept
Bizarre Inc
Coil
Agnes Bernelle
Psychic TV
Dave Ball
Wiseblood
Einstürzende Neubauten
Swans
The Dark Poets
Kontour
Pedro INF
Satanicpornocultshop
Soft Cell


== Discography ==


== Footnotes ==


== External links ==
Some Bizzare Records