The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of 53 of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Diamond and Pearl versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== ChatotEdit ==
Chatot (ペラップ, Perap), known as the Music Note Pokémon, is Parrot-like has a head similar to an eighth note as well as a tail like a metronome. It mimics human speech due to its tongue being just like a human's. It is brightly colored with blue wings, a yellow "bib" and a green stomach. Chatot also possess a white collar similar to a ruff. Its body is covered with many multi-colored feathers giving it a resemblance to a black masked lovebird. Chatot are found in wooded grassland and thick forest, preferably with much rain. Chatot mainly eat fruit, nuts and seeds.
In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl when a Chatot learns its signature move Chatter, the trainer can record a custom call from the game menu. The sound is garbled to avoid the recording of obscenities. Chatot can only be caught in the morning or during the day. The player can trade a Buizel for this Pokémon in Eterna City. Chatot also appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness as the second in command to Guildmaster Wigglytuff.
In the anime, Chatot was first seen in Pokémon Ranger and the Temple of the Sea as The Phantom's pet. In the anime, a Chatot was the previous year's champion of a Pokémon Cosplay Convention by singing like a Jigglypuff then a Lapras. Chatot was Wigglytuff's assistant for his guild in the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time & Darkness special. A Chatot also appeared as a partner of an Officer Jenny. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Pearl owns a male Chatot that was his first Pokémon. He is fairly strong and is occasionally used for battling.


== SpiritombEdit ==
Spiritomb (ミカルゲ, Mikaruge), is a fourth generation Pokémon, based on the Jibakurei, a spirit cursed to forever be bound to one place. Its name is derived from the words,' spirit ' and ' tomb '.
Its body (if one can call it that) is little more than a swirling, green face in a purple vortex floating from above a broken rock (called The Odd Keystone). Spiritomb is formed from 108 evil spirits that are bound together to the Odd Keystone. In addition, Spiritomb weighs 108kg, its Sinnoh region Pokédex number is 108, and its base Defense and Special Defense are 108. This connection to the number 108 is due to the mystical significance that it has in Buddhism; it is the number of temptations one must overcome to reach nirvana.
Along with Sableye, Spiritomb held the distinction of being one of two Pokémon with a type pairing that has no weaknesses against it under normal circumstances(Eelektross is a third Pokémon with no weaknesses under normal circumstances, but this is due to Levitate and not a type combination). This, however, can be circumvented with the ability Scrappy or the moves Odor Sleuth, Miracle Eye, or Foresight. Also, in Generation VI, the Fairy Type was introduced. Spiritomb is vulnerable to Fairy-Type attacks (they are super effective against Dark Types) and will thus suffer heavy damage from them. Unlike Sableye, Spiritomb is offensively and defensively stronger, has the ability Pressure, and has a wider movepool. However, Sableye can take better advantage of its non-attacking moves with Prankster, which grants them priority.


== GibleEdit ==
Gible (フカマル, Fukamaru), known as the Land Shark Pokémon, are small, pudgy dragons with big mouths filled with sharp teeth. Gible are dark blue, with a red underbelly that covers the abdomen to the bottoms of the jaw. Gible have two horns that resemble jet or plane engines, each with a light blue stripe in the middle. They have light blue stripes on their backs. Gible are coldblooded. A male has a cut on his dorsal fin, while the female does not. This may signify that male Gible fight more, leaving scars. Gible hide in their holes and wait for prey to pass by. They occasionally hold dare competitions with each other which can put them in danger. When they bite, they hurt themselves out of clumsiness. Gible lives in tunnels it constructs inside warm caves. It prefers heat similar to that of a tropical climate. They are most likely carnivores. However, they are sometimes found with the Haban Berry.
Gible can be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. Gible made a cameo in the movie The Rise of Darkrai where it was battling a Bronzor, and again as one of the victims to Darkrai's Dark Void. A balloon shaped like a Gible also appeared in the movie. Gible made its debut anime appearance in DP145. Another one later appeared in DP156 and started following Ash. It would later appear again in the next episode, where it gets captured by Ash. One of the running gags by Ash's Gible is that it likes to constantly bite things, usually Ash's head. Another gag is that whenever it tries to use Draco Meteor, it usually fizzles out and ejects a lone energy ball that always manages to hit Dawn's Piplup, no matter how hard it tries to evade it.


== GabiteEdit ==
Gabite (ガバイト, Gabaito) is a Dragon/Ground-type like Gible. Its name is derived from the word, "bite". Gabite evolves into Garchomp at level 48. There is a long-held belief that medicine made from its scales will heal even incurable illnesses. This is referenced in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness with the Gabite Scale item, which heals all status conditions. Gabite habitually digs up and hoards gems in its nest. Its loot is constantly targeted by thieves and crooks.


== GarchompEdit ==
Garchomp (ガブリアス, Gaburias), known as the Mach Pokémon, are dark blue, with a red underbelly that covers from the middle of its abdomen, to its jaws, and then to the undersides of its arms. Garchomp is a Pseudo-Legendary and the only one in the Sinnoh Region. Underneath the red is a gold diamond shape as well a gold cross on its snout. Garchomp have appendages that resemble jets, airplanes and hammerhead sharks; its four fins, one on each arm, one dorsal fin and another on its tail that resembles a shark tailfin; horns that resemble jet/plane engines rest on its head, resembling a hammerhead. It has spikes on its hind limbs and arms as well as sharper claws than its previous evolution. Its eyes have black scleras and gold colored irises. When it folds up its body and extends its wings, it looks like a jet plane, and flies at speeds equal to one. Its body is covered in fine scales that reduce drag. It never allows its prey to escape. Its amazing Attack and Speed make it a tough opponent.
The Sinnoh Pokémon League Champion, Cynthia, owns a Garchomp. In the anime, Cynthia uses Garchomp in her battle against Paul, where it managed to defeat his team with relative ease. A female Garchomp is used by one of the students of Pokémon Summer Academy in the first leg of the Pokémon Triathlon in One Team, Two Team, Red Team, Blue Team!. Also, if the anime episode Lumiose City Pursuit! is to be believed, Garchomp has a Mega Evolutionary form.


== MunchlaxEdit ==
Munchlax (ゴンベ, Gonbe), known as the Big Eater Pokémon because he is fat and chubby, has a dark teal-colored body with a cream-colored spot on its chest. Its round head is dark teal in the top half and cream on the bottom half. It has big, round eyes and large pointy ears. It has five-fingered hands and cream-colored feet with three clawed toes. Munchlax eats its weight in food once a day, swallowing food whole with almost no chewing. It hides food under its long body hair. However, it forgets it has hidden the food.
In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, a player can get a Munchlax by breeding a Snorlax with the item Full Incense held, or by slathering a tree with honey and waiting for one to appear. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team, Munchlax is a rarely seen NPC who gives the hero a Munch Belt if they picks up an apple it drops. However, you cannot encounter Munchlax as an enemy or recruit it as a team member. Munchlax is available as the hero of Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness. Munchlax is available for a partner from Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. Munchlax appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a Poké Ball summon, where it walks around and eats items on the stage. An event from May 6, 2010 to June 25 allowed players of Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver to access a route on the Pokéwalker which contained a variety of Pokémon which knew attacks that they were not normally compatible with, including Munchlax which knew the move "Selfdestruct".
In the anime, Munchlax first appeared in Destiny Deoxys, where it evolved into a Snorlax to stay afloat in the Block Bot flood, making it the first Generation IV Pokémon to appear in the anime. May currently owns a Munchlax, which she captured in Berry, Berry Interesting. A trainer named Kylie owns a Munchlax, which was seen in A Full Course Tag Battle!. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Diamond owns a Munchlax, which was his first Pokémon and is often seen eating with him. In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl Adventure!, a Collector, Ruin Maniac, Psychic and Galactic Grunt are all searching for a Munchlax, which is said to be very rare. Its Pickup ability takes Hareta's Pokédex but Munchlax returns it later.


== RioluEdit ==
Riolu (リオル, Riolu), known as the Emanation Pokémon, is the pre-evolution of Lucario, which evolves through happiness in the daytime. In Pokémon Diamond, Pearl and Platinum, Riolu is obtained from an egg given to the player by a Trainer called Riley upon navigating him through Iron Island and defeating the Galactic Grunts at the end. A Riolu that knows Aura Sphere, an attack Riolu cannot legitimately learn until it evolves into a Lucario, can be obtained from a special mission in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia and transferred over to any of the main series Generation IV games.
Riolu is a small, blue, Pokémon. Its legs and torso are colored black. Riolu's tail is blue and it has a yellow 'collar'. Riolu has a black "mask" and red eyes. It is said in the Pokédex that Riolu are sensitive to a special type of energy called Aura. Riolu can emanate these waves to communicate with each other, and share emotions. Like almost all Fighting-type Pokémon, Riolu naturally has superhuman strength, stamina, and endurance and is capable of making long journeys on foot in a short amount of time.
In the anime, Riolu has made an appearance during Pokémon Ranger and the Kidnapped Riolu! Parts One and Two, which aired as a one-hour special commemorating the release of Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. This Riolu had been trained to use Aura Sphere and was unnaturally strong. It was taken away from its owner by a group that wanted to exploit it but Ash and co. returned it, with Kellyn's help. This Riolu developed a strong bond with Ash. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Maylene has a Riolu. It is seen using Drain Punch against Pearl's Monferno, who Platinum borrowed in order to fight her. Then, when Diamond's is traveling alone, he is given an egg by Riley, which eventually hatched into a Riolu. In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl Adventure! Hareta gained a Riolu egg in Serious Training on Iron Island!! which hatched into a Riolu later on in that chapter.


== LucarioEdit ==

Lucario (ルカリオ, Lucario) is a Pokémon that is around four feet in height. Lucario's hands are black and have one white spike on each arm on the upper-side of its wrists. In addition, there is a third spike on Lucario's chest. Lucario has a large snout and ears. Lucario also has a furry yellow torso, and its thighs are in the shape of what looks like blue shorts. It has the ability to sense the aura in all living things, and the one featured in the film is capable of telepathic human speech, similar to Legendary Pokémon of past films. It can read the thoughts and movements of other beings by sensing the aura that they emit. A trained Lucario is able to sense aura and identify the feelings of creatures up to half a mile away. Because of its ability to sense auras, Lucario can see otherwise invisible foes. Lucario has a pre-evolution, Riolu, which evolves when it reaches a certain point of happiness during the day.
Lucario was a central character in the film Pokémon: Lucario and the Mystery of Mew.


== HippopotasEdit ==
Hippopotas (ヒポポタス, Hipopotasu) can be found in the Ruin Maniac's cave. It is fairly rare, though will appear more often as the length of the cave increases. This Pokémon and its evolutions have quite different gender forms. The female has a brown replacing the color on the snout and on its body, while the male is a yellowish tan. Unlike the aquatic animal the Hippopotamus, which is what it's loosely based on, Hippopotas lives in deserts, and hates getting wet; ironically, it is one of the few Ground-type Pokémon without a secondary Water type that can learn Water Pulse.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== HippowdonEdit ==
Hippowdon (カバルドン, Kabaldon) is the evolved form of Hippopotas. It is a large hippopotamus that is usually depicted with sand pouring out of holes on its back. It uses this sand to create sandstorms for attacking. Its mouth can span seven feet, and like a real hippo's mouth, has extremely strong jaws. In Diamond and Pearl versions, it is mentioned in a bookcase in Harbor Inn in Canalave City, that this Pokémon created the deserts of the world, but the spirit of the desert is Flygon, and the heat was created by Camerupt. Males are colored yellow, while females are colored black. In the games, Hippowdon has the ability "Sand Stream", which whips up a 5-turn sandstorm whenever it is introduced into battle.


== SkorupiEdit ==
Skorupi (スコルピ, Sukorupi) is the pre-evolved form of Drapion, and unlike its adult form is a Bug/Poison type. Skorupi seems to resemble a standard scorpion, only with 4 legs, instead of 8. Its tail is used for gripping prey and injecting poison into them. It ambushes prey by hiding in the sand and waiting patiently.
Skorupi has 2 abilities: Battle Armor, preventing critical hits on Skorupi, and Sniper (a newer ability), which triples the damage of an attack instead of doubling it during the case of a critical hit. The only places one can find a Skorupi is in the Great Marsh in Sinnoh and on the slopes of Reversal Mountain in Unova.


== DrapionEdit ==
Drapion (ドラピオン, Dorapion) Classified as the "Ogre Scorp" Pokémon, at level 40, Skorupi grows much larger and more dangerous with its evolution. This Pokémon's resemblance to the scorpion has not been much increased, as it still has only four legs and two arms. These arms are mounted on the sides of its head, which has a full 360-degree field of view, and carry enough power to turn a car into a scrap heap. This gives Drapion a much larger range of attack. Drapion's sole weakness is the Ground type. Despite it no longer being Bug-type, Aaron of Sinnoh's Elite Four has a Drapion.


== CroagunkEdit ==
Croagunk (グレッグル, Guregguru, Greggle) uses the poison sacs in its cheeks to communicate with others. Its move Poison Jab has a tendency to stun Pokémon and people. Male Croagunk differ from female Croagunk in that the white bands on their chests are lower than in the female, as well as the black band on both arms. Croagunk and its evolutionary form, Toxicroak, are a combination Poison/Fighting type, making it doubly weak against Flying moves and Ground moves, and quadruply weak against Psychic moves but strong against Grass moves, Fighting moves, Poison moves, Dark moves, Bug moves, and Rock moves.
In the anime, Team Rocket leaves a Croagunk in the episode "Gymbaliar". Brock later befriends it and captures it. It has been known to use its Poison Jab move on Brock when he expresses interest in any woman, taking the previous role of Misty and Max. It is a powerful fighter and only known losses were to Paul's Torterra, Jessie's Seviper and Dawn's Aipom, though it fought many Pokémon before it under Jessie's control without rest.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. GamesRadar ranked Croagunk along with Aipom fifth on their list of "Five unintentionally scary Pokemon," noting that their permanent large smiles are unwavering and scary.


== ToxicroakEdit ==
Toxicroak (ドクロッグ, Dokuroggu, Dokurog). Toxicroak, like Croagunk, is based on the poison dart frog. Toxicroak has knuckle talons and, instead of cheek pouches, a large vocal sac. Venom is produced in this sac, and is churned for extra potency when Toxicroak croaks. This strong toxin is pumped into its claws through tubes in its arms. Toxicroak has large leg and arm muscles, necessary for jumping and punching. Commander Saturn of Team Galactic owns a Toxicroak.


== CarnivineEdit ==
Carnivine (マスキッパ, Masukippa, Muskippa) resemble Venus Flytrap; in fact, the Japanese name for this Pokémon is derived from the scientific name of the plant. Capable of levitation, it attracts its prey with its sweet-smelling saliva, then chomps down. It takes a whole day to eat its prey. Its diet consists chiefly of bugs (presumably weak ones, as Bug-type attacks are ironically super effective against Carnivine). The only place Carnivine is obtainable is in the Great Marsh in Pastoria City.
In the Anime, James from Team Rocket has a Carnivine who always bites his head. This Carnivine is one of James' childhood Pokémon friends whose Poké Ball was hidden inside a box of bottle caps at his family's cottage in the Sinnoh Region. James found it after years of separation. Like James' two Grass-type Pokémon before it, Victreebel and Cacnea, Carnivine has a tendency to affectionately attack James when released from its Poké Ball.
A GamesRadar editor stated that she likes Carnivine due to the "cool look on its face", a sentiment which another editor shared and added that it was a "wacky Grass type" but "not very good". The first editor stated that "you can't really tell if it's gonna give you a hug or bite your face off". Another editor described its look as if it's about to pounce on something and eat it.


== FinneonEdit ==
Finneon (ケイコウオ, Keikouo) is known as the Wing Fish Pokémon. It resembles a black-and-blue betta fish with a pink stripe down its middle. Its name is derived from the words, "fin" and "neon" - due to its natural ability to glow (caused by bioluminescence). After long exposure to sunlight, the patterns on its tail fins shine vividly when darkness arrives. Similarly, the pink line on its side, in place of a lateral line on real fish, glows at night as well. According to the Pokédex entry, it is also considered as the Beautifly of the sea due to its beautiful scales. It can also learn Silver Wind, a move usually learned only by winged Bug-types like Beautifly.


== LumineonEdit ==
Lumineon (ネオラント, Neoranto, Neorant), known as the Neon Pokémon, has a rounder appearance than that of its pre-evolution, Finneon. Lumineon has pectoral fins that resemble butterfly wings, with a wavy patterning of dark blue on them. Lumineon has teardrop-shaped pelvic fins on its chest. Lumineon uses the patterns on its four tail fins to attract prey. To avoid detection by predators, it crawls along the seafloor using the two fins on its chest. Swimming in the darkness of the deep sea, Lumineon look like stars shining in the night sky. Lumineon usually make their home in deep sea trenches or the ocean floor, though small schools of them are known to reside in freshwater rivers and lakes. It competes for food with Lanturn.
Lumineon first made a brief appearance in The Rise of Darkrai. Lumineon's debut anime appearance was in Up Close and Personable! where it lured Pokémon to it with its glowing fins.


== MantykeEdit ==
Mantyke (タマンタ, Tamanta), known as the Kite Pokémon, looks like a manta ray. It has wide fins, and a completely flat body. On its back is a pattern with two red spots with white outlines and a white curve underneath; all this resembles a happy face. The pattern on its back differs by region. Mantyke has the ability to swim at high speeds. A friendly Pokémon, it captures the subtle flows of seawater using its two antennae. People organize tours to see this Pokémon frolic and skim the tops of the waves with Remoraid. When it swims close to the surface of the ocean, people aboard ships are able to observe it.
In Pokémon Ranger and the Temple of the Sea, Jack Walker uses the Capture Styler on Mantyke in order to use it to help him reach the temple. It made its debut appearance in the anime in Following a Maiden's Voyage during the beginning narration of the episode. Mantyke made its next appearance in the anime in One Team, Two Team, Red Team, Blue Team!, used by Ash in the second leg of the Pokémon Triathlon.


== SnoverEdit ==
Snover (ユキカブリ, Yukikaburi) is a "frosted tree Pokémon," that first appeared in the 4th generation of Pokémon. Snover is a small, tree-like Pokémon that appears mid to late game. On its head it has a white hat-like structure resembling a mountain with three peaks.
Because of its lack of human contact, Snover is known to be boldly inquisitive. Male and female Snover vary in appearance by their stomach's pattern, with the male having an extra brown zigzag. The Grass/Ice typing is unique to Snover and its evolution Abomasnow.
The ability Snow Warning is also unique to Snover's line, and causes the weather to change to hail when Snover is brought into battle. Prior to Pokémon X and Y, the hail brought by Snow Warning would be permanent until overridden by another weather-changing ability or move. Because of its type pairing, Snover and Abomasnow are the only Grass-type Pokémon that cannot be taught Sunny Day (a Fire-type move where the Pokémon makes the sun come out for 3-5 turns; often used in conjunction with Solarbeam).
It makes some cameos in the anime, but played an important role in the episode The Lonely Snover, where it became friends with Ash & co., but Team Rocket tried to kidnap him twice because they thought the berries would boost profits, and lead to their success, but they failed both times.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== AbomasnowEdit ==
Abomasnow (ユキノオー, Yukinoō, Yukinooh) is the evolved form of Snover and, like its previous evolution, is a "Frost Tree", and has Grass/Ice typing. It blankets wide areas in snow by whipping up blizzards. In the Pokémon world, Abomasnow is the Abominable Snowman, and is also known as "The Ice Monster".
Its ability, Snow Warning, creates a damaging hailstorm. It can be found on the peak of Mt. Coronet in the Sinnoh region and is the highest-level Pokémon used by the seventh Gym Leader of Snowpoint City, Candice on Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Abomasnow is now the first Pokémon in alphabetical order, an honor held by Abra since Generation I. Abomasnow also appears in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U as a Poké Ball summon, using a two-pronged attack involving Blizzard and Ice Punch.


== WeavileEdit ==
Weavile (マニューラ, Manyūra, Manyula), known as the Sharp Claw Pokémon, takes on the appearance of a black, bipedal, warrior-like weasel garbed in a red crown and a red collar. Weavile has three claws on each paw, instead of two like its pre-evolved form, Sneasel, and is much more devious. A female Weavile has smaller ears than a male one. They are also known to travel in larger groups as well of about four to five individuals, living in cold climates and hunting prey with impressive coordination. They convey messages to others by scratching odd symbols in ice or on the bark of trees.
Weavile made its first appearance in the eighth movie, Pokémon: Lucario and the Mystery of Mew. It was then introduced in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl as Sneasel's evolved form. Sneasel evolves into Weavile when it levels up at night while holding the Razor Claw. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, a female Weavile leads Team AWD, a team that pursues the challenges of Zero Isle. Arbok and Drapion hold her in high respect, referring to her by the title of 'Lady'. Weavile also appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a Pokéball Pokémon and as a trophy. When released, it uses False Swipe, dashing across the battlefield multiple times and dazing opponents. Weavile is a playable character in Pokkén Tournament. Plus, Weavile is simply the best Pokemon there is.


== MagnezoneEdit ==
Magnezone (ジバコイル, Jibakoiru, Jibacoil in original Japanese versions), known as the Magnet Area Pokémon, is the evolution of Magneton, and has an appearance similar to that of a UFO. Magneton evolves from exposure to a unique magnetic field, which can only be found inside Mt. Coronet in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. This causes a mutation in the Magneton; one of the Magnemite that this Pokémon consists of has grown bigger than the other two; its pupil has dilated and turned red; and the screw on top appears to have been replaced by a yellow antenna upon evolution. The remaining Magnemite form the "shoulders" of Magnezone, and the screws on the top of their head have grown significantly larger. They also appear to have lost one magnet each. Magnezone has three horse-shoe magnets. Two are positioned in a fashion that resembles a pair of claws, and a third is positioned as a tail. Its body is surrounded by a thin metal rim. Scientists once tried to evolve Magnezone, but Magnezone is unable to evolve. It is approximately three times heavier than Magneton. The body has a silver color like Magnezone's pre-evolved forms. To earn a Magnezone, one's Magneton must be leveled up in the Sinnoh region's Mt. Coronet, the Unova region's Chargestone Cave, Route 13 in the Kalos region, or New Mauville in Hoenn to evolve it.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, a Magnezone serves as the police chief of Treasure Town, along with some Magnemite. He takes away the outlaws the main character defeats and gives them rewards for it. It also appears in the eleventh movie, Giratina and the Sky Warrior, under control of the villain, Zero.


== LickilickyEdit ==
Lickilicky (ベロベルト, Beroberuto, Berobelt in original Japanese versions), is known as the Licking Pokémon. It is large and pink, with a very long (though slightly shorter) tongue like its pre-evolved form, Lickitung. It has a rather fat appearance and has what seems to be a curl of hair on its head. Lickilicky also has thumb spikes, a curly tail, and a white bib-like pattern on its chest in front of the neck. Lickilicky uses its tongue to administer things with saliva, which contains a numbness solvent, as well as decomposing properties. It stores this saliva in a special space in its throat.
Lickilicky is one of several Pokémon of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl that evolve from a Pokémon from a previous generation, Lickitung. It does so when it knows the move Rollout and levels up, but only in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl and any game released afterward. This fact makes it one of only four Pokémon (the others being Mamoswine, Tangrowth, and Yanmega) that evolve from a previously obtainable Pokémon in a way that would have been possible in previous games, and that way is by learning a certain move.
Not much else can be discerned from Lickilicky's pre-evolved form, except it can learn Explosion, meaning that it is the only Pokémon (besides Smeargle through its unique Sketch move) that can learn Explosion and receive STAB from it as well.


== RhyperiorEdit ==
Rhyperior (ドサイドン, Dosaidon, Dosidon), known as the Drill Pokémon, is the evolved form of Rhydon, a Pokémon from Generation I. It appears in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. It stands completely upright, and its color has changed from gray to dark brown with burnt orange plates, formed by a type of biological "fusion" with the Protector item, needed for Rhydon to evolve. Its second horn grew out from a Rhydon having the main horn pointed forward. The female's upper horn is smaller. In addition to its extra armor, it has developed an Ankylosaur-like tail, protrusions from its elbows, and holes in the palms of its hands, which it uses to fire rocks at enemies. According to the Pokédex, it sometimes accidentally fires Geodude instead of rocks.


== TangrowthEdit ==
Tangrowth (モジャンボ, Mojanbo, Mojumbo), known as the Vine Pokémon, is the evolution of Tangela as of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl when Tangela learns the attack, AncientPower, paralleling Yanmega's and Mamoswine's evolutions. Tangrowth, like Tangela, is mostly covered in thick, curly blue vines. As with Tangela, its white eyes are visible beneath them. It has thick, black legs with rounded pink feet. It also has two long, viny arms with three fingers each. Females tend to have more red on the fingers. Tangrowth uses its flexible boneless arms to trip prey. It also does not mind if its arms get torn off by enemies, because they soon regrow. Tangrowth's vines also seem to have morphed together, whereas Tangela's vines are all completely separate.


== ElectivireEdit ==
Electivire (エレキブル, Erekiburu, Elekible), known as the Thunderbolt Pokémon, is the evolution of Electabuzz that is first introduced in the last episode of Pokémon Battle Frontier. Electivire's back has a symbol that looks similar to a socket outlet, similar to how a previous form of it, Elekid, resembled a plug. It has red eyes and also seems to resemble the yeti or sasquatch. The small red parts on the end of its pair of tails resemble red LEDs. According to its Pokédex entry, it can shoot 20,000 volts of electricity out of its tails. To get one, one must trade an Electabuzz while holding an Electrizer.
An Electivire owned by Gary Oak was first seen on the final episode of Pokémon: Battle Frontier. He used his Electivire, which he got in Sinnoh, to beat Ash Ketchum's Pikachu in a one-on-one battle. He later used it to help Ash protect a group of Shieldon from Hunter J. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, an Electivire serves as the town's move relearner.


== MagmortarEdit ==
Magmortar (ブーバーン, Būbān, Buuburn), known as the Blast Pokémon, is the evolution of Magmar that is first introduced in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. It has three sharp rows of claws on each hand that it can retract to transform its arms into powerful cannons, similar to mortars. These cannons are capable of firing 2000 °C (3632 °F) fireballs . Its body is large and round with striped yellow and red flame markings wrapping around it. It has pink spikes on its back and flames for shoulders and a tail. Magmortar make their homes in the craters of volcanoes. Magmar evolves into Magmortar when traded while holding the Magmarizer.
In the anime, Paul's Magmar is revealed to have evolved into Magmortar some time before his full battle with Ash.
In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine, Magmortar was voted as one of the best Fire-type Pokémon. They described it as being able to "blast fireballs that are over 3600 fahrenheit from its massive cannon arms". They criticized it for its appearance, comparing it to Krusty the Clown.


== TogekissEdit ==
Togekiss (トゲキッス, Togekissu), known as the Jubilee Pokémon, is the evolved form of Togetic that is first introduced in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. It evolves from Togetic with a Shiny Stone. It resembles a moderately sized bird covered with white down. It has a crest similar to its earlier forms Togepi and Togetic, with blue and red feathers. There are two feet that are close to each other. Along its chest are spots that resemble small red and blue triangles like those of its pre-evolutions. Its overall shape resembles that of a flying wing aircraft. According to the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl Pokédex, Togekiss is only seen when there is peace between humans and Pokémon. In correlation to this, its appears to be based on a dove, which is considered as the symbol of peace. Its sightings have become rare in recent times, possibly due to real-world war.

GamesRadar described Togekiss as being "a star-spangled Stealth Bomber of love".


== YanmegaEdit ==
Yanmega (メガヤンマ, Megayanma), known as the Ogre Darner Pokémon, evolves from Yanma in the fourth generation games by learning the attack AncientPower and leveling up. Yanmega resembles a giant dragonfly, as does its pre-evolution, Yanma. Both Yanma and Yanmega's names are derived from "Oniyanma", the largest species of dragonfly in Japan. Yanmega itself is based on the prehistoric dragonfly Meganeura, which lived during the Carboniferous era.
Yanmega attacks with ultrasonic waves generated by its wings, which give foes internal injuries. Its wings are so powerful, it uproots large trees when it takes off in a forest. Its jaws are also well developed and very strong. It is adept at biting opponents hard while flying by at high speeds.
In battle, it moves faster each turn with the ability Speed Boost or increases the power of ineffective attacks with Tinted Lens. It is the largest known Bug Pokémon. It also has the highest Special Attack stat of all Bug-type Pokémon.
In the anime, Jessie owns a Yanmega. She captured her as a Yanma and gave her to Giovanni, but he rejected her and sent her back to Jessie. She then trained her herself and evolved into Yanmega in the same episode. She was later confirmed to be a female when a female Togepi's "Attract" move had no effect on her.


== LeafeonEdit ==
Leafeon (リーフィア, Rīfia, Leafia in original Japanese language) is a Verdant Pokémon,and is covered with tattered leaves, along with patches of moss-green fur. Besides leaf-like ears and long, branch-like tail, there are a multitude of smaller leaves growing from the knees, chest, and back. A larger, curled leaf grows from the middle of its forehead, and is the same soft green color as all of the other leaves. Leafeon has plant-like characteristics alongside its animal nature; as such, it is photosynthetic, and as a result, it is always surrounded by clean air. It is one of two evolutions of Eevee that is obtained from training it in a certain location, the other being Glaceon, an ice-type Pokemon. It is obtained by leveling up an Eevee near the mossy rock located in Eterna Forest in the Sinnoh region, Pinwheel Forest in the Unova region and the Winding Woods in the Kalos region.


== GlaceonEdit ==
Glaceon (グレイシア, Gureishia, Glacia), known as the Fresh Snow Pokémon. Being an ice-type, it prefers cold climates, and as a protective measure it freezes its fur completely. This freezing causes the hair to resemble "ice needles." It is one of two evolutions of Eevee that is obtained from training it in a certain location, the other being Leafeon. The location needed to evolve Eevee into Glaceon is on Route 217 in the Sinnoh region. There is an ice-covered rock here, but it is also possible to level up anywhere in grass on Route 217 to evolve. In the Unova region, the rock can be found in a cavern in Twist Mountain. It can be located at the very bottom to the mountain. There is also an ice-covered rock in the Kalos region's Frost Cavern, but the Surf move is required in order to reach it.
In the anime, May's Eevee evolved into a Glaceon prior to her reappearance during her recent visit to Snowpoint City and for the Wallace Cup arc. A Glaceon under the ownership of Cynthia appeared in an episode of Pokémon: Black & White: Rival Destinies to aid in healing a sick Meloetta.


== GliscorEdit ==
Gliscor (グライオン, Guraion, Glion), known as the Fang Scorp Pokémon, is the evolved form of Gligar. Gligar evolves into Gliscor when it is holding a Razor Fang and levels up at night. Gliscor appears to be a combination of a vampire and a gargoyle and a more sinister form of Gligar whose limbs are now independent of its bat-like wings and a narrow waist. It has two fully developed pincers for hands and has two barbs on its tail, as opposed to Gligar's one, giving its tail the resemblance of vampire's fangs. It is also one of the few Pokémon who can not learn STAB attacks through leveling-up until Generation 5, only through TMs. In the English anime, it's voiced by Marc Thompson.
In the Anime, Paul is seen catching a Gliscor, which was the leader of a group of Gligar. Ash's Gligar eventually evolves into Gliscor in Fighting Fear with Fear!, where he would, in Mastering Current Events! leave it for training to master the move Giga Impact.


== MamoswineEdit ==
Mamoswine (マンムー, Manmū, Mammoo), known as the Twin Tusk Pokémon, resembles a cross between a boar and a woolly mammoth. Mamoswine's name is derived from the words mammoth and swine. The tusks are much larger than those of Piloswine and seem to be shifted downward. The tusks of the male are larger than those of the female. The tusks are made from solid ice instead of dentin like most teeth are. Mamoswine were common around the Ice Age but their numbers dwindled as the climate warmed up. It is the evolution of Piloswine from Pokémon Diamond and Pearl onwards. It evolves when Piloswine is leveled up while knowing the move AncientPower. In order to teach it this move, the player must dig up a Heart Scale in the underground, give it to the Move Maniac in Pastoria City and request AncientPower from the list of past learned moves. However, AncientPower is also an egg move for Swinub.
In the anime, Dawn's Piloswine evolves to Mamoswine and then charges at them. Despite its bad behavior, Dawn is still eager to train Mamoswine well in hopes that it would regain the good behavior it had as a Swinub.
GamesRadar editor Carolyn Gudmundson listed "Pig noses" as one of the most overused Pokémon designs, listing Mamoswine as one of the examples. They further stated that "a stubby nose on an animal that usually has a large trunk is slightly disconcerting".


== Porygon-ZEdit ==
Porygon-Z (ポリゴンZ, Porigon Zetto), known as the Virtual Pokémon, is the evolution of Porygon2 from Pokémon Diamond and Pearl onwards. It is evolved when traded with an item called the Dubious Disc. Porygon-Z's appearance is similar to that of Porygon and Porygon2, which were supposedly earlier designs by Silph Co. The programming added to create Porygon-Z was intended to allow it to surpass all other Pokémon, but as a result, Porygon-Z began to exhibit odd behaviors and the data used to program it became glitched, giving it its odd appearance.
Porygon's evolutionary line is notable for being the only evolutionary line that contains two evolutions both triggered through trading. Porygon-Z is notable for having the second highest Special Attack, one of two statistics that influence the power of an attack, among non-legendary Pokémon. Second only to Chandelure, it shares this title with another Pokémon, Alakazam.

Due to the notorious episode of Pokémon causing seizures to many Japanese viewers (Dennō Senshi Porygon), Porygon-Z, like its pre-evolutions, since has never appeared in the Pokémon anime outside of a few brief cameos. The official anime artwork of Porygon-Z was released, suggesting that it will appear in the show. Porygon-Z appears as a collectible trophy in Super Smash Bros. for 3DS.


== GalladeEdit ==
Gallade (エルレイド, Erureido, Elrade), known as the Blade Pokémon, was first introduced in the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series as a new evolved form of Kirlia and Ralts. It is a Psychic/Fighting type, and a counterpart to the previously existing Gardevoir. Possibly because Gardevoir is a very feminine-looking Pokémon, male Kirlia are given an opportunity to evolve into a more masculine Pokémon. When a male Kirlia is exposed to a Dawn Stone, it will evolve into a Gallade.
The name is a portmanteau of words "gallant" and "blade". It retains the same green, white, and red color scheme as the others in its family. The crest on its head is reminiscent of the helmet of a hoplite. Sharp, green, spear-like blades extend from Gallade's elbows, which Gallade uses skillfully and powerfully in battle. These blades can be retracted into Gallade's elbows when not in combat, possibly so that it does not somehow manage to hurt those it is close to. Being a Psychic-type, it also has the ability to read its opponent's mind, giving it the upper hand in battle.
Gallade are known to be valiant and noble fighters, adept at both melee combat and swordplay. They are noble in the sense that they follow strict codes of manners and conduct in and outside of battles. This sense of honor can be compared to that of a samurai's or knight's. The way they fight is based on a mix of the Brazilian martial art and dance of Maculelê, and the Japanese weapon Tonfa. They share a similar behavior to a Gardevoir of showing a sense of loyalty and obedience to their trainers.
Gallade also is one of Zoe's Pokémon, shown in the Grand Festival
Gallade appears in the tenth Pokémon movie, The Rise of Darkrai. He does gain a fighting type to use Close Combat such as Lucario and Terrakion


== ProbopassEdit ==

Probopass (ダイノーズ Dainoosu) known as the Compass Pokémon, is Rock/Steel dual type. Its nose is a disguise and its arms are pointy rock. It is the last evolution of Nosepass. Its English names are Proboscis (Relating to its nose) and Compass (Instrument that determines direction) Probopass is one of the only Pokémon that can have the ability sturdy; along with Magnezone, Stellix, Carracosta, Onix, Forretress, Aggron, Golem and Shuckle. It is Diamond and Pearl and Roark's other Pokémon.


== DusknoirEdit ==
Dusknoir (ヨノワール, Yonowāru, Yonoir), known as the Gripper Pokémon, is the final evolution of Duskull, obtained by trading a Dusclops that is holding a Reaper Cloth. It appears only in Pokémon Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum. Dusknoir's body is mostly black, with four almond shaped eye-like markings (two in the front, two in the back) and a yellow horizontal zigzag line below the "eyes" along which the entire torso can open and close like a mouth, giving the impression of a face. This "face" also glows brightly when Dusknoir powers up for attacks. Dusknoir now has developed arms. Two yellow bands are near its wrists and its grey hands are similar to Dusclops'. Dusknoir has a grey, cylinder-shaped head with another yellow band near the top and a single black eye with a yellow iris and a red pupil. On top of its head is a yellow antenna which allows this Pokémon to receive transmissions from the spirit world, from where it receives commands to take people there. In addition, Dusknoir may have ties to the Grim Reaper, as the player needs a Reaper Cloth in order for it to evolve as well as it being a Gripper Pokémon, a portmanteau of Grim Reaper altered to fit Dusknoir's grabbing trait. Dusknoir has a ghostly tail instead of feet like Dusclops, resembling the stereotypical depiction of a genie. Its English name is a portmanteau of the English word "dusk" and "noir" (the French word for "black").
A Dusknoir appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness as a main villain of the game. He is a tyrant from the future world and deceives everyone into trusting him and outing Grovyle as a villain, but in fact, he is an agent of Primal Dialga sent to the present time to prevent Grovyle from restoring the future.
Dusknoir weighs in at 235 pounds, making it the third heaviest Ghost Pokémon, and the heaviest that is a pure Ghost-type (since Spiritomb is a Ghost/Dark type and Giratina is Ghost/Dragon type) and is 7'03", making it tallest pure Ghost-type (since Giratina is Ghost/Dragon type).
On Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia, this will be the second to last boss of the Mainstream Missions. Blake Hall, the Leader of the Sins Trios and Team Dim Sum, summons it by the power of the Shadow Crystal from the Haruba Desert.


== FroslassEdit ==
Froslass (ユキメノコ, Yukimenoko), known as the Snow Land Pokémon, appears to be based on the Yuki-onna, a Japanese snow spirit, hence being a Ghost-type. It bears a humanoid appearance, unlike Snorunt or Glalie. Its name is a pormanteau of the words frost, referring to ice and cold, and lass, another reference to a young girl. Its main body color is white with a red stripe around the waist and two red fins on her back (designed to resemble a kimono obi). Froslass' arms are attached to its head as opposed to its torso, and each has a three-fingered hand and a blue fin on the wrist (representing the sleeves of a kimono). The head is tear shaped and has a purple lower jaw. Two small blue "horns" made of ice are on Froslass' head, along with a purple diamond-shaped crater in the center of its forehead. There are two holes on each side of the head which a yellow eye is seen on each one. Froslass does not have feet; it floats in the air like its counterpart, Glalie. Its torso appears to be hollow, as it is stated in the Pokédex's entry for Froslass. A female Snorunt will evolve into Froslass after a Dawn Stone is used on it.
It attacks prey and unsuspecting victims in icy snowstorms, where its Snow Cloak ability allows it to go unseen (yuki-onna are said to have skin so pale that they can actually blend into their snow-covered surroundings). To render its foes and victims helpless, it blows an icy wind that can reach as low as -60˚F. Its head has a slight resemblance to Celebi's.
In the Pokémon Platinum version game, Candice, Gym Leader of Snowpoint City, owns a Froslass as one of her Ice-type Pokémon.
A Froslass resides in Crevice Cave, a Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness Dungeon, acting as a Boss Pokémon fighting to keep captive a frozen Scizor.
In Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia, Ice, the leader of the Sinis Trio, summoned a Froslass as one of the Almia Temple boss Pokémon.


== RotomEdit ==
Rotom (ロトム, Rotomu), known as the Plasma Pokémon, is a small, floating Pokémon whose body consists of plasma, which can infiltrate electronic devices. They are mischievous, and wreak havoc on electrical appliances just for the fun of it. Pokémon Platinum introduced five new forms of Rotom: Frost Rotom, Wash Rotom, Mow Rotom, Fan Rotom, and Heat Rotom. Each form's appearance corresponds to a household appliance (a refrigerator, a washing machine, a lawn mower, a desk fan, and an oven, respectively). In the Pokémon universe, researchers are looking into Rotom as the power source of a unique motor.
Rotom are shaped like lightning rods, while the blue aura of electricity around them takes the appearance of lightning. Rotom's eyes and aura of electricity change colors when it changes form. Rotom's looks and abilities were inspired by Pulseman, a game that Game Freak worked on before Pokémon. Rotom is the word motor backwards; this may refer to the fact that motors make many appliances function, while Rotom makes them fail.
The only available Rotom in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl resides in a possessed television in an old haunted château. It's only possible to catch them after 8:00 PM but before 4:00 AM. In North America, Toys "R" Us gave out Secret Keys, which unlocked Rotom's forms, via Mystery Gift from April 20, 2009 to May 12, 2009. The alternate forms of Rotom may also be accessed in Silph Co. in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver. In the anime, Rotom made its debut appearance in Get Your Rotom Running! in all its different forms, toying around with Ash and friends. In Pokémon Adventures, Rotom appeared in the television at the Old Chateau. In the manga, in the old chateau while Platinum was waiting for Pearl and Diamond to get her tea, various Gastly started to spook Diamond and Pearl and also a Rotom as a leader who Diamond and Pearl thought was a ghost. However Diamond and his Pokémon managed to get the Rotom inside its television as Diamond knows that it is Rotom's home, because there were two characters of his favourite show outside the Old Chateau.


== UxieEdit ==
Uxie (ユクシー, Yukushī, Yuxie), known as the Knowledge Pokémon, has a round head and a yellow "helmet" on it with a red jewel embedded in its forehead, and in its Sugimori art it appears to be sleeping, or closing its eyes in deep thought. Uxie's name comes from the word pixie, a small mythical creature, and "you", U being short for it. The other members of the Psychic-type Lake Trio, Mesprit and Azelf, represent "me" and "us", respectively. It is also a possibility that these three Pokémon are inspired from a trio of Arabian goddesses, Al-Lat (Azelf), Manat (Mesprit), and Al-Uzza (Uxie). This is further supported by their moniker as Mirage Pokémon (as mirages are something associated with the Arabian desert), and that the three appear to be wearing jeweled turbans, which are associated with Arabic royalty. Uxie's eyelids are also yellow, although they are obviously not part of the top of the head where the other yellow is. Its "helmet" resembles a human brain, since it is the Knowledge Pokémon. Like Mesprit and Azelf, its partners in the legendary trio, it has two tails with jewels embedded in them, and the only major difference between them is their heads and their faces. Of its trio, its stats and moveset seem to be on the defensive side. It is also believed that the mystic trio was all hatched from the same egg. Uxie is found in Lake Acuity. Uxie chose Brock and is connected with him, like what Mesprit did to Dawn and like what Azelf did to Ash. Uxie is referred to as "The Being of Knowledge". It is said that its wisdom can help humans improve their lives. Similar to the legend of the basilisk where the basilisk could cause death by a single glance, Uxie can cause a complete loss of memory by a single glance of its open eyes; hence, its eyes are always closed, even when it is moving or in battle. It uses its telekinetic abilities to figure out what's going on instead. Uxie is also seen in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness as a legendary Pokémon that protects the Time Gear at Fogbound Lake.
According to the Sinnoh legend, Uxie was born to Arceus, alongside Mesprit and Azelf, after the Pokémon Universe was created.


== MespritEdit ==
Mesprit (エムリット, Emuritto, Emrit), known as the Emotion Pokémon, is a legendary Pokémon that is part of the Psychic-type Lake trio along with Uxie and Azelf. This Pokemons name originates from Me- (just like the U/you of Uxie) and sprite. A sprite is a small mythical creature similar to a fairy (just like the pixie/xie of Uxie). Mesprit's spirit often exits its body, leaving it on the bottom of Lake Verity. It has a small pink body about the size of Mew with two long tails, each with jewels in them, and is identical to Uxie and Azelf except for its head. It has a pink head with a jewel embedded in its forehead, has four long droops and yellow eyes. Mesprit is referred to as "The Being of Emotion," and is said to have taught humans the nobility of sorrow, pain and joy. It is said to fly over the land and have been the birth of emotions. If someone touches Mesprit, that person will lose his or her emotions in three days' time. It is thought to have come from the same egg as Uxie and Azelf.
According to the Sinnoh legend, Mesprit was born to Arceus, alongside Uxie and Azelf, after the Pokémon Universe was created.
It sleeps at the base of Lake Verity, but once engaged in battle, it will rise from the water to fly around the Sinnoh region. Its stats and moveset make it the more balanced member of its trio. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, it guards a time gear in the Quicksand Cave's Underground Lake and is referred to as a female. In Super Smash Bros. Brawl on the Spear Pillar stage the Lake Trio occasionally makes a cameo appearance during the fight; they do nothing, however. In the Pokémon Anime Dawn sees the projected soul of Mesprit near Lake Verity in "Following A Maiden Voyage!". Mesprit chose Dawn and is connected with her. A statue and silhouette of Mesprit appears in A Secret Sphere of Influence. Mesprit itself appeared in season 12 episode, "The Needs of the Three!", where it, along with Uxie, came to Lake Valor after Azelf was captured and the lake trio are eventually released in the following episode.


== AzelfEdit ==
Azelf (アグノム, Agunomu, Agnome), known as the Willpower Pokémon, is a legendary Pokémon that is part of the Psychic-type Lake trio along with Uxie and Mesprit. It has a small light blue body about the size of Mew with two long tails, each with red jewels in them, and is identical to Uxie and Mesprit except for its head. It has a blue, almost cone-shaped head with a red jewel embedded in its forehead and also two blue dropping ears, as well as yellow eyes. Referred to as "The Being of Willpower", it controls people's motivations, making them either give up on an activity or attempt it repeatedly. If someone attempts to harm it, Azelf will drain the victim's will to live in five days and make him/her immobile for all eternity.
According to the Sinnoh legend, Azelf was born to Arceus, alongside Uxie and Mesprit, after the Pokémon Universe was created.
It is the offensive member of its trio. Its attack capabilities are counteracted by Uxie's defensive stats and moves. Residing and sleeping at the base of Lake Valor, it keeps the world in balance. It is believed to have come from the same egg as Uxie and Mesprit. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, it guards a time gear at Crystal Crossing. In Super Smash Bros. Brawl, on the Spear Pillar Stage, the Lake Trio occasionally makes a cameo appearance during the fight; they do nothing, however. Azelf appeared in spirit form to Ash, much like Mesprit did to Dawn. Azelf chose Ash and is connected with him, like what Mesprit did to Dawn, and like what Uxie did to Brock.


== DialgaEdit ==
Dialga (ディアルガ, Diaruga), known as the Temporal Pokémon, is described as an ancient deity of the Sinnoh region with the ability to control time. According to Sinnoh-region lore, it was created by Arceus, at which point time began to flow. Being able to control time, it uses its power to travel at will through the past and future, similar to Celebi. Dialga is a sauropod-like Pokémon. It is mainly dark blue with some gray metallic portions, such as its chestplate, which has a diamond in the center. It also has various light blue lines. It has a somewhat wing-like structure on its back, and a crest on its head, resembling a type of dinosaur. Dialga also has two horns on top of its head, two fang-like horns around its mouth, long claws and a short tail.
Dialga is not obtainable in Pearl, in the same way that Palkia is not obtainable in Diamond. In Diamond, however it could be obtained using cheats and through trading it is summoned by the defeated leader of Team Galactic, Cyrus, who hopes to have it create a new universe for him, at the Spear Pillar on top of Mt. Coronet. It is stopped by Uxie, Mesprit, and Azelf, which nullify its power, and can be captured or defeated by the player. In Platinum it can be caught after finding the Adamant Orb and returning to the Spear Pillar. The Adamant Orb is used to amplify its Steel- and Dragon-type attacks when held by Dialga.
Dialga also appears in the Wii title Super Smash Bros. Brawl in the background of the Spear Pillar stage, along with Palkia and Cresselia. It will usually just stand in the background, but will occasionally attack the players and/or alter the flow of time. It appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness in another form known as Primal Dialga, created when his home, Temporal Tower, is destroyed as part of Darkrai's evil plan to cause the planet's paralysis. Primal Dialga has lost almost all reason and seeks nothing but self-preservation.
Dialga appears in the tenth movie of the Pokémon anime along with Palkia. It fights with Palkia and Darkrai, nearly destroying Alamos Town. Dialga made another appearance in the eleventh movie on its return trip back to its own dimension. Dialga enters the Reverse World and is attacked by Giratina. Dialga appears once again in the twelfth movie, this time co-starring with both other members of its trio, and plays a significant role in Ash's new mission to calm Arceus after a misunderstanding related to its supposed betrayer, Damos.
In an interview, Pokémon Diamond and Pearl director Junichi Masuda noted Dialga's and Palkia's name as two of the most difficult to create, due to an effort to make them appealing to both Japanese and American audiences. During localization of the game, Spanish translators complained the name sounded too close to alga and that it gave them the impression of seaweed. Regardless, the name was left unchanged.


== PalkiaEdit ==
Palkia (パルキア, Parukia), known as the Spatial Pokémon, is a legendary Pokémon and part of the Legendary Dual Dragon/type Creation trio, along with Dialga and Giratina. It represents spatial matter whereas Dialga represents time and Giratina represents dimension and antimatter. Palkia, like Dialga, has a dinosaur-like appearance, but is more similar to a theropod, contrast to Dialga being similar to a sauropod. Palkia has wings on its back which can open up and purple stripes on its neck and tail. Palkia also has a pink pearl on each shoulder plate. In Sinnoh-region lore, it and Dialga are said to be created by Arceus, at which point time and space began to take form and matter began to take shape. According to Platinum, Palkia's breath keeps space and matter stabilized. It can also create and destroy whole dimensions at a time. Its signature move is "Spacial Rend", a powerful blast of energy that can distort space, much like Dialga's "Roar of Time" and Giratina's "Shadow Force", which influence their respective elements.
Palkia is not obtainable in Diamond, in the same way that Dialga is not obtainable in Pearl. In Pearl, it is summoned by the defeated leader of Team Galactic, Cyrus, who hopes to have it create a new universe for him, at the Spear Pillar on top of Mt. Coronet. It is stopped by Uxie, Mesprit, and Azelf, which nullify its power, and can be captured or defeated by the player. In Platinum it can be caught after finding the Lustrous Orb and returning to the Spear Pillar. Palkia is faster than Dialga and Giratina but has slightly weaker defensive stats. Its special item is the Lustrous Orb, which amplifies Palkia's Water- and Dragon-type attacks when held by it.
Palkia also appears in the Wii title Super Smash Bros. Brawl in the background of the Spear Pillar stage, along with Dialga and Cresselia. Like Dialga, Palkia will occasionally attack the players or sometimes the stage itself. Palkia later appears as a Poké Ball summon in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, using Spacial Rend to simultaneously flip stages upside-down and reverse player controls. Palkia makes an appearance in tenth movie of the Pokémon anime along with Dialga and Darkrai, in which it fights with Dialga and nearly destroys Alamos Town. In Pokémon: Giratina and the Sky Warrior, it did not have a main role, but appeared in a flashback to its battle with Dialga from the previous movie. Finally, in the twelfth movie, Palkia, alongside Dialga and Giratina, attempts to stop their creator while Ash and friends travel back in time to fix the past.
In an interview, Pokémon Diamond and Pearl director Junichi Masuda noted Dialga's and Palkia's name as two of the most difficult to create, due to an effort to make them appealing to both Japanese and American audiences.


== HeatranEdit ==
Heatran (ヒードラン, Hīdoran), known as the Lava Dome Pokémon, is one of the legendary Pokémon that premieres in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Heatran has a large body made of magma, large intimidating jaws, and a silver helmet-like structure on the head. It has four legs, each locked by a steel bangle. Heatran lives inside Stark Mountain, a large volcano found in the Sinnoh region, burrowing into the mountains with its cross-shaped feet. Heatran is also one of the few (if not only) legendary Pokémon that has a definite gender.
Another Heatran appears in the Unova region's Reversal Mountain in Black 2 and White 2. If the player brings the Magma Stone from Route 18 to the bottom of the mountain, Heatran will appear.
In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine, Heatran was voted as one of the best Fire-type Pokémon, citing its signature move, Magma Storm.


== RegigigasEdit ==
Regigigas (レジギガス, Rejigigasu), known as the Colossal Pokémon, is one of the legendary Pokémon that premiered in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Its name technically means King of the Regis. It is similar to the three Regis - Regirock, Regice, and Registeel - in name, body structure, the markings on its body, and the fact that all four Regis are weak to Fighting-type attacks. It will only appear in the game if the three Regis, after being transferred via Pal Park, are in the player's party while examining Regigigas's body. Regigigas sleeps in the Snowpoint Temple for thousands of years, so long that moss has grown over its body, and modern humans thought it was just a statue of the Pokémon. A legend in the game states that long ago Regigigas towed continents using ropes. Its signature move is called "Crush Grip", and behaves like the move Wring Out, as it deals more damage if the opponents HP is high. The legend says that it had unbelievable strength, but seemingly since it has not used it in ages, it has trouble getting its act together at the beginning of a battle, evidenced by its ability, Slow Start. It has the fourth highest Attack stat of all Pokémon, after Deoxys's Attack Forme, Black Kyurem, and Rampardos. In Platinum, Regigigas's level is reduced to 1, making it the lowest level non-glitch wild legendary Pokémon. Platinum also states that it had shaped Regirock, Regice, and Registeel out of rocks, ice and magma.
A Regigigas appears in the Unova's Twist Mountain in Black 2 and White 2. As with Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum, if the player brings a Regirock, Regice, and Registeel to its resting place, it will awaken and attack. Unlike in Diamond and Pearl, the three can be captured within Black 2 and White 2 as well.
Regigigas was given away at Toys "R" Us stores across America on March 8–21. It was also distributed in the UK at different town fétés and celebrations. This is the only version of Regigigas that can be used to trigger the awakening of Regirock, Regice, and Registeel out of slumber in Pokémon Platinum in their respective caves.
It arrived with a herd of Mamoswine in Pokémon: Giratina and the Sky Warrior and used its massive strength to stop a glacier from destroying everything. But even with the help of the herd of Mamoswine, it was unable to hold back the glacier for long, probably because of its ability, Slow Start, taking effect.
It also appears in an episode of the anime, where it is forcefully awakened by Pokémon Hunter J, resulting in it going on a rampage.


== GiratinaEdit ==

Giratina, or the Renegade Pokémon was banished to the Distortion world for its violence. (Distortion world fact: The Distortion world is named for the fact that common knowledge is distorted and strange). The Distortion world is the only way for Giratina to revert to its origin form from its altered form besides giving it the Griseous orb. Its name origin for Giratina is based on the red opal Girasol and Platina an alloy of Platinum or the Pokémon the game that Giratina is the mascot of. From OR / AS (Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire), Giratina has 4x weakness against nothing, a 2x weakness to Dark, Ice, Fairy, Dragon and Ghost types, a neutral affect against Ground, Flying, Psychic and Steel types, A 2x resistance to Fire, Water, Grass, Electric, Bug and Poison types, a 4x resistance to nothing, and immunities to Normal and Fighting types. Some people call Giratina the devil Pokémon Because it has 6 red tips in total on its 2 black wings, it has 6 gray legs, each surrounded by yellow claws, and its gray body with black and red stripes is surrounded with 6 yellow patterns (similar to that of its claws.)


== CresseliaEdit ==
Cresselia (クレセリア, Kureseria), known as the Lunar Pokémon, is one of the legendary Pokémon that premieres in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. She is exclusively a female, swanlike Pokémon but is unable to breed. She has an ornament on her head that resembles a crescent moon, and has three rings on her torso that look similar to the rings of Saturn. Photons are given off by her veil-like feathers when she flies and on nights around the quarter moon, the aurora from her tail extends and undulates beautifully. Cresselia is a symbol of the moon, and she has the power to repel nightmares caused by Darkrai. It is said that she chases Darkrai every night. When this Pokémon is near, sleeping people and Pokémon nearby experience wonderful dreams. She can also heal psychological scars. The Pokémon is encountered on Fullmoon Island after a sailor takes the player to the island, in hopes of obtaining the Lunar Wing to save his son from a nightmare induced by Darkrai. When encountered, she flies to different locations in Sinnoh. As a roaming legendary, she is encountered at Level 50. Her signature move is "Lunar Dance", which causes Cresselia to faint but fully heals the next Pokémon the player sends out. She has extraordinary hitpoints and defensive stats. Cresselia makes her anime appearance in Season 11: Sleepless in Pre-Battle, in which she sends a wild Darkrai away and stops it giving the villagers nightmares.
A Cresselia appears in Unova's Marvelous Bridge in Black 2 and White 2, provided the player has a Lunar Wing.
Cresselia appears in the Wii title Super Smash Bros. Brawl in the background of the Spear Pillar stage, along with Dialga and Palkia. However, Cresselia only appears rarely, and will attack the stage when she does so. She is a protagonist in the post story of Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness/Sky, where she helps the player and partner battle Darkrai and save the planet once again.


== PhioneEdit ==
Phione (フィオネ, Fione), known as the Sea Drifter Pokémon, is a Pokémon that can be obtained by breeding Manaphy and Ditto, though Phione will not evolve into Manaphy.
It is currently the only Pokémon that cannot evolve into the Pokémon from which it is bred, and it is the only Pokémon able to be bred from a legendary. Phione itself can breed with Ditto, but it will only produce other Phione and not a Manaphy. Because of Phione's relation to Manaphy, there is evidence on both sides of the issue of Phione's status (or lack thereof) as a legendary Pokémon. As it is the offspring of a legendary, and is banned from the Sinnoh Battle Tower, many people think it is a legendary. However, its lacklustre stats and ability to breed more of itself lent evidence to the idea that Phione was not a legendary. In the official game guide to Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, which is made by The Pokémon Company International, it is stated that Phione is not legendary. Many things that Manaphy has two of, Phione only has one of (Phione has one antenna, only one gem on its stomach, and has one "eyelash" coming from each eye, while Manaphy has two of these).
Since it is the product of a bred Manaphy, they share many traits. It is the same shade of blue, it has the same large eyes, only blue, and has "eyelash" markings similar to Manaphy. It has a large knob-shaped bump on its head from which extends a long, ribbon-like antenna, somewhat resembling a sailor's cap, though in fact it is a flotation device. Instead of feet, it has a small point and Instead of two jewels, it has a single "ruby" in the middle of its tiny body. It has two large fins in proportion to its body, which it uses to navigate through the oceans that it lives in. While Manaphy is said to live in cold seas, where the Sea Temple is hidden, it is said Phione live in warm seas.


== ManaphyEdit ==

Manaphy (マナフィ, Manafi), known as the Seafaring Pokémon, is a blue blob-like Pokémon. It has two long antennae extending from atop its head. At the end of these antennae are round objects. Manaphy can use its antennae to use its signature move, "Heart Swap", and switch people's energy. It also has jewel-like markings on its stomachs one large red gem and a very small yellow gem below it. It is said to live in cold waters, and migrate miles away from its home only to return.
Manaphy made its debut in the 9th Pokémon anime film, Pokémon Ranger and the Temple of the Sea. In the video game series, Manaphy is only obtainable through a Nintendo Event, or by completing Pokémon Ranger and completing the special Manaphy mission, which will only become available after the player inputs a password, which has been revealed by Nintendo on numerous occasions. It can also be obtained from Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== DarkraiEdit ==

Darkrai (ダークライ, Dākurai), known as the Pitch-Black Pokémon, is a legendary Pokémon resembling a dark, sinister ghost, such as the Grim Reaper or the incubus demon. Darkrai is a living nightmare, or a manifestation of many nightmares. The top of its body is connected to the lower half by a tiny waist, giving it an hourglass-shaped figure. It has a red spiky growth around its neck and long white mane flows from its head, obscuring one of its blue eyes. Its club-shaped arms have three claws each, with parts of them appearing tattered. Its shoulders also have long tatters and it appears to be wearing an old ripped cloak or dress. It is able to extend stilt-like extensions to use as "legs". Darkrai possesses the power to lure people and Pokémon into deep sleeps and show them frightening nightmares. Darkrai resides on Newmoon Island (a mirror-image of Fullmoon island in which Cresselia resides), and on nights of the new moon, when it is active, it shows horrible nightmares to both humans and Pokémon. Platinum states that despite all this, it means no harm and is loyal to the ones it trusts. It apparently resides on Newmoon Island all by itself because it does not wish to harm anyone.
Darkrai was released on July 19, 2007 in Japan with the movie Dialga vs. Palkia vs. Darkrai, and it was released in the United States in Toys R' Us stores shortly after the showing of the English dub, The Rise of Darkrai. In the anime, it was featured in the movie Pokémon: The Rise of Darkrai, in which it stops Palkia and Dialga from destroying Alamos Town. His dark voice was provided by Scot Williams in the film. This Darkrai in particular seems to have power to match Dialga and Palkia, though it may just refer to this one and not the whole species. It was released again in for players of the games, Pokémon Black and White on May 9, 2012 to June 10.
Its signature move, "Dark Void", attempts to put all opponents to sleep. Its ability, Bad Dreams, slowly damages sleeping opponents every turn, and Platinum states that this is really just a defense mechanism. Because of its excellent offense, speed, and its signature move, Darkrai is not permitted in standard battling. The Member's Card item from a Nintendo Event is required to capture Darkrai. However, it is possible to obtain a Darkrai by "migrating" it over to your DS game after completing a special mission in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, it is revealed to be the main antagonist and is the one who tried to bend the fabric of space/time through the use of controlling Dialga and Palkia. It even disguised itself as its opposite, Cresselia, as well as masquerading as the hero's partner for a short time, to aid in achieving its goal. In video games revolving around only Pokémon (in other words, without human characters) Darkrai continues to be depicted as a "villain", probably due to its dark nature, with its most recent appearance as an antagonist being in PokéPark 2: Wonders Beyond. In Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, it'll use Dark Void after being released from a Poké Ball


== ShayminEdit ==
Shaymin (シェイミ, Sheimi), known as the Gratitude Pokémon, is a hedgehog-like Pokémon that premiered in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. In its original hedgehog-like form officially named Land Forme, its fur is pure white and instead of quills, Shaymin has green grass growing on its back along with pink flowers growing on the sides of its head, giving it an even more flower-like appearance. It also has another form officially named Sky Forme, where it becomes reindeer-like, keeping its white body but gets a green touch at the end of its legs, and also getting a mohawk-like head decoration and two leaves on its neck somewhat resembling a scarf. Shaymin resides in the Flower Paradise, a flower-filled field untouched by humans.
In order to go unnoticed by intruders or attackers, in its Land Forme it utilizes its own form of camouflage, rolling up into a ball resembling a flower in a patch of grass. By doing so, it blends in with the surrounding flowers, going undetected even if the attacker is beside it. Shaymin also has the power to decompose the toxins in the air and turn the land into flower fields in an instant. It is said to have turned the desolate area of Floaroma Town into a fertile field.
Shaymin's ability changes between forms. In Land Forme, its ability is Natural Cure, which heals status ailments upon switching out. In Sky Forme, its ability is Serene Grace, which increases the chances of added effects happening. Its signature move is "Seed Flare", which is a shock wave from Shaymin's body. Nurse Joy describes it as a process in which Shaymin purifies polluted air it inhales in its body and then expels it in the form of light and water.
Shaymin first appears in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl along with Pokémon Platinum. It is not readily available in any of the games; instead, players have to receive it by either using the item Oak's Letter which was distributed by Nintendo in 2009, or by directly getting a Shaymin handed out in several events; the most well known in US being the Toys "R" Us event ran also in 2009. In Pokémon Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum, one is able to obtain a Gracidea Flower from a lady in Floaroma Town which allows a fatefully encountered Shaymin to transform to its Sky Forme. Outside of the main games, Shaymin appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky, Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs, Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia, Pokémon Rumble, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure.
Shaymin is featured in the movie Giratina and the Sky Warrior. In the movie, Shaymin appeared to show a timid nature. While in the Reverse World, where Giratina resided, it panicked frequently thinking that Giratina wanted to eat it, and was careful not to lose its wariness. Despite this, it tends to have an overall prideful personality. It is especially confident in its Sky Forme. It is able to talk telepathically.
IGN's Nintendo Team called Shaymin a "fan favorite". Video Gamer's James Orry called it "one of the most unusual and highly popular Pokemon". Fellow editor Raymond Padilla called it "the cutest Pokemon ever!" He added that while it being only Grass type in its original form made its move pool "comparatively limited", its Seed Flare attack is "one of the nastiest moves we've ever seen". He also wrote that it would make a "great cleric" but wrote that "if you take away Seed Flare, it pretty much becomes a poor man's Celebi". Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Tom East called it "one of the rarest and most popular Pokémon".


== ArceusEdit ==
Arceus (アルセウス, Aruseusu), known as the Alpha Pokémon, is a powerful Normal-type legendary Pokémon. Sometimes called "The Original One" it is believed to have shaped the universe with its "thousand arms". It has a white colored body, gray underside, a long mane, gold hooves, green eyes with red pupils, and has a large, golden wheel around its abdomen, connected by spikes filled with gems. Its origin is described in a book called "The Original Story", which states that Arceus was born from an egg in a vortex of pure chaos before the existence of the universe. It proceeded to create three beings from itself, Dialga and Palkia, which created time and space, and Giratina, representing antimatter. It also created Azelf (Being of Willpower), Uxie (Being of Knowledge), and Mesprit (Being of Emotion), which created spirit, and then went into an everlasting sleep. Arceus has a special ability to use various Plates, stated to be fragments from the universe's creation filled with the power of "defeated giants", which allow it to switch to any of the eighteen types. They are found throughout the Sinnoh region, and feature inscriptions about their origins. Arceus can learn the signature move 'Judgment', which changes type with the Plate it is holding; Arceus' plates can also be found in the Undella Bay area in Pokemon Black Version and Pokemon White Version and all across the Kalos region in Pokemon X and Pokemon Y. Prior to Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire, Arceus's alternate forms are not registered in the Pokédex along with Genesect.
It first made its appearance in the video games Pokémon Diamond and Pearl and later in its remake Pokémon Platinum. It has since appeared in all subsequent titles. Notably, it was given away in promotions for the above-mentioned games, using a key item called the Azure Flute in the Hall of Origin above Mount Coronet or through an official Nintendo Mystery Gift event. In Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver Arceus unlocks an area where either Dialga, Palkia, or Giratina can be obtained at level one. There was a promotion where Japanese players could receive Arceus in Pokémon Black and White in a mode called the Pokémon Dream World after winning a popularity poll of Pokémon species. Outside of the main series, Arceus only makes a significant appearance in Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs. It makes a minor appearance in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky as a statue. Until March 2012, there was an Arceus event in North America for Pokémon Black and White users, in which it had to be befriended. Arceus also makes an appearance in Pokémon Conquest, where it is said to have created the Ransei Region and appear before the one who unites all 17 kingdoms within Infinity Tower. Once the player link with it, Arceus is used to battle Nobunaga, who reveals that the Pokémon is the reason why Ransei is in conflict and must be destroyed. However, after he and allies are defeated, Nobunaga relents after seeing Arceus not to be affecting the player's mind before the Pokémon takes its leave. Arceus also appears in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, using Gravity once released from a Poké Ball.
Arceus is featured in Pokémon: Arceus and the Jewel of Life, in which it was supposedly betrayed by Damos, and thus views humans with contempt (similar to Mewtwo from the first movie) and vows to inflict judgement on them. However, due to an alteration of the past by Ash and his friends, Arceus's rage resides and leaves in peace. It is voiced by Akihiro Miwa in the Japanese version and Tom Wayland in the English dub. Arceus appears in a manga adaptation of the above-mentioned film as well as the opening pages of the HeartGold and SoulSilver chapters of the Pokémon Adventures manga.
In an official Pokémon popularity poll conducted by Nintendo in late 2010 spanning the first four generations, Arceus was voted into 1st place over Pokémon such as Darkrai, Mew, and Pikachu. Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Chris Scullion ranked Arceus among the 10 best Pokémon due to its versatility, strength, and rarity that makes Arceus "potentially strong against any Pokémon". Destructoid's Jonathan Holmes called it a "bad cross between a Yu Gi Oh monster and the spirit of the forest from The Princess Mononoke". An editor for Japan Cinema wrote that Arceus was under-utilized in the movie and that it "could have been used better to convey the story that he's the god pokemon".


== ReferencesEdit ==