Nine Days in One Year (Russian: Девять дней одного года) is a 1962 Soviet black-and-white drama film directed by Mikhail Romm about nuclear particle physics, Soviet scientists (physicists) and their relationship.
The film won the Crystal Globe Award in 1962.


== Plot summary ==
Two young physicists, an afflicted experimenter Dmitri Gusev (Batalov) and a sceptical physicist-theorist Ilya Kulikov (Smoktunovsky) carry out nuclear researches at a Siberian research institute. Dmitri heads the researches begun by his teacher Sintsov who as a result of experiment had received a deadly dose of radiation. Gusev is irradiated also. Doctors warn that any more radiation will kill him. At that time his friend Ilya and Lyolya who loved Dmitri developed a romantic relationship. The enamoured couple prepares for a wedding and look for a possibility to inform Dmitri about it. When they meet, Dmitri already suspects this and coldly received Lyolya and Ilya. Lyolya is caught up in self-contradictions, and as she tries to establish his true feelings for her she learns about the terrible diagnosis. Realising that she still loves Dmitri, Lyolya cancels her wedding to Kulikov and weds Gusev.
Despite the doctors' advice, Gusev continues with experiments. After a number of failures he turns to Kulikov for help. Whilst carrying out of the experiment that ended successfully, Gusev receives a new radiation dose. He hides this fact from everyone, including his wife who incorrectly interprets his isolation, but the truth eventually comes to surface. Research work is continued by Kulikov. Dmitri's health worsens, but he decides to fight the illness to the end and agrees to an operation in bone marrow transplantation.


== Reception ==
Hoberman, J. (2000-11-12). "FILM; From a Soviet Era That Dared to Defy The Ruling Dogma". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-02-06. 


== Cast ==
Aleksey Batalov as Dmitri Gusev
Innokenty Smoktunovsky as Ilya Kulikov
Tatyana Lavrova as Lyolya
Nikolai Plotnikov as professor Sintsov
Sergei Blinnikov
Yevgeniy Yevstigneyev as Nikolai Ivanovich
Mikhail Kozakov
Valentin Nikulin
Pavel Shpringfeld
Aleksandr Pelevin
Yevgeni Teterin as professor Pokrovsky (surgeon)
Nikolai Sergeyev as Gusev's Father
Ada Vojtsik
Valentina Belyayeva as doctor
Lyusyena Ovchinnikova
Off-screen voice by Zinovi Gerdt (narrator).


== References ==


== External links ==
Nine Days in One Year at AllMovie
Nine Days in One Year at the Internet Movie Database