Robert "Bobbito" García (born September 25, 1966 in New York City), also known as DJ Cucumber Slice, Kool Bob Love, is a DJ, writer, streetball player/coach/announcer, and member of the Rock Steady Crew.


== Career ==

From 1990 to 1998, García co-hosted The Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito Show on WKCR. It featured exclusive demo tapes and in-studio freestyles from many then-unsigned hip hop artists such as Nas, Big Pun, Jay-Z, Busta Rhymes, Fat Joe, Cam'ron, DMX, Wu-Tang Clan, Fugees, Talib Kweli, Big L and The Notorious B.I.G. who later found great success on major record labels. He set up the vinyl-only label Fondle 'Em Records in 1995 as an outlet for other guests such as MF DOOM, MF Grimm, Kool Keith and Cage. In 1998 The Source named The Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito Show as the "Best Hip Hop Radio Show of All Time".
In 2000 hip hop artist Necro included a Live freestyle from a Bobbito WKCR show recorded on 4/20/2000 on his debut album "I need Drugs". The two have collaborated as early as 1994.
In 2003, García created Bounce: From the Playground, a quarterly magazine devoted to streetball, especially the playground scene in New York City. He has been an editor, writer, and photographer for the magazine, and has also done work for and been featured in magazines including Vibe and The Source. He wrote Where’d You Get Those?: New York City's Sneaker Culture 1960-1987. He hosted the ESPN show It's the Shoes, interviewing celebrities about their sneaker collection. He was featured in the sneaker documentary Just for Kicks and performed the announcer's voice in NBA Street Vol. 2, NBA Street V3 and NBA Street Showdown. He is emcee of the Sprite Slam Dunk Contest in the video game NBA 2K8, 2K9 and 2K10.
In 2006, Madison Square Garden Network hired García to do the "Hot Minute at the Half" reports with celebrities in the crowd during Knicks home games. He became the first Latino broadcast member in the 60-year history of the franchise. In 2007, he worked with Nike on limited edition Nike Air Force 1 and Air Force 25 models, selecting the colors, fabrics and logo used, and designed the "Project Playground" limited edition of the Adidas Superstar. In 2009, he worked on Blokhedz animated web series on Missiong.com.
García is the annual Boost Mobile Elite 24 HS All-American Game play-by-play announcer for ESPNU, owner of the vinyl-only label/imprint Álala Records, and co-directing, with Kevin Couliau, the documentary Doin' It In The Park: Pick-up Basketball, New York City by 360 Creative Films, which premiered in New York theaters in June 2013.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official DJ page
CNN Headline News Feature