Jesmond is a residential suburb and is split into two electoral wards just north of the centre of Newcastle upon Tyne, England. The population is about 12,000. Historically part of Northumberland, it is adjacent to the East side of the Town Moor, providing pedestrian and cycle paths to Spital Tongues and the city's two universities. It is widely considered to be one of the most affluent suburbs of Newcastle.


== History ==
According to local tradition, some time shortly after the Norman conquest there occurred in the valley of the Ouse an apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary. It seems reasonable to suppose that the Virgin was beheld with the infant Christ, because up until that time Jesmond had been known as Gese Muth "the mouth of the Ouse" while afterwards it was known as Jesmond, popularly interpreted as "the hill of Jesus", or "Jesus Mound". The ruins of St Mary’s Chapel, first recorded in 1272, are in Jesmond Dene on the west side of the valley, but local tradition holds that the apparition itself occurred at St Mary’s Rock which stands in the midst of the brook next to the ruins of Ridley Mill. If this tradition is correct it may indicate that the chapel was a slipper chapel at which pilgrims removed their shoes before walking the remaining distance to the site of the apparition barefoot.
A trace of the processions to the shrine which occurred at this time is found in the name of that section of the former Great North Road running north of the Tyne called Pilgrim Street. During a period in which the shrine was in need of repair it was endowed with indulgences by a rescript or edict of Pope Martin V on certain feasts of the liturgical year. A spring known as St Mary’s Well of uncertain date may also be found near to the chapel. It has the word "Gratia" inscribed upon the stone above it. The greater part of the history of the shrine, its origins and the miracles which were said to have occurred there, were lost in the 16th century when the chapel was suppressed in the Reformation and fell into ruin. The ruin and its grounds later passed through various owners (one of whom tried to turn the well into a bathing pool). It was acquired by Lord Armstrong in the 19th century and given by him to the City of Newcastle. Mass is now offered there on occasion by the local Roman Catholic priest and the Roman Catholic Bishop of Hexham and Newcastle. Flowers along with letters and candles are often left in the ruins by pilgrims and others, and it is the site for an annual Christian and Muslim women-only prayer event. A booklet outlining the surviving history of the chapel may be obtained from the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Name on North Jesmond Avenue.
More recently, The Beatles wrote their second hit single She Loves You in the Imperial Hotel in Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne on 27 June 1963.


== Areas of Jesmond ==

The area is notable for Jesmond Parish Church, Holy Trinity Church, Jesmond Dene woodland and the Royal Grammar School. The area's principal commercial area forms around Osborne Road, Acorn Road and St George's Terrace, the former being dominated by hotels and bars, and the latter by shops and cafes.
Newcastle City Council has designated  three conservation areas within Jesmond; Brandling Village, South Jesmond and Jesmond Dene.
The Mansion House was owned by a wealthy industrialist Arthur Sutherland, 1st Baronet, and is one of the most impressive residential properties in Jesmond. Built in 1887, the property was donated to the city by Sutherland in 1953 and is now the official residence of the Lord Mayor and can be used for private events. The house, situated in the centre of Jesmond previously sat in 5 acres (20,000 m2) of land. One acre of the land including previous stables were sold as a private property, now owned by relatives of Arthur Sutherland.
Along with Leeds and Belfast, Jesmond is experiencing studentification. It is a popular residential area for students attending Newcastle University and Northumbria University. Osborne Road in Jesmond has a strong student population with a selection of student bars, restaurants and housing.
Newcastle Cricket Club plays its home games at Osborne Avenue, which is also a home venue for Northumberland County Cricket Club. The cricket club is currently on a 50-year lease to Newcastle Royal Grammar School. The Jesmond Lawn Tennis club is also popular for socialising.
Jesmond is one of the 24 areas in England to have a real tennis club which is used to hold events.


== Notable people ==
Notable Jesmond residents have included the actor Christian Steel, industrialist William Armstrong, philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, actor James Scott, English Rugby Union player Mathew Tait, footballers Shola Ameobi, Kevin Nolan and Jonás Gutiérrez journalist and broadcaster Nancy Spain, concert pianist Denis Matthews, writer Catherine Cookson, writer and poet Michael Roberts, singers Bryan Ferry and Sting, countertenor James Bowman, TV/Radio broadcaster, journalist and actor Bill Steel, (songwriter and record producer Steve Hillier, novelists Eva Ibbotson, Yevgeny Zamyatin, and Denis MacEoin (aka Daniel Easterman and Jonathan Aycliffe). Arthur Sutherland 1st Baronet, and Carole Middleton (mother of the Duchess of Cambridge). The only Briton to die in the Killing Fields of Cambodia, John Dewhirst, was born in Jesmond. Chris Donald and Simon Donald, the founders of Viz, spent their early lives on Lily Crescent in Jesmond. Theoretical physicist Peter Higgs lived in Jesmond as a young baby and toddler.


== Jesmond schools ==


=== Primary schools ===
West Jesmond Primary School
West Jesmond is a 4-11 primary school. The original building was demolished in 2008 and a new school rebuilt on the same site. The new school building opened on 2 March 2009


=== Independent schools ===
Royal Grammar School, Newcastle
Central Newcastle High School (girls only)
Church High School (girls only)
Central Newcastle High School and Church High School merged in September 2014 to created Newcastle High School for Girls
Northern Counties School for the Deaf
Newcastle Preparatory School


== Notable buildings ==
Jesmond Synagogue


== Film ==
The La Sagesse School in Jesmond (now closed and being developed for housing) was used as a set for the Dumping Ground in the popular children's television series Tracy Beaker Returns, starring Dani Harmer.


== Metro stations ==
Jesmond is served by the Tyne and Wear Metro, with stations at Jesmond, West Jesmond and Ilford Road. Jesmond station is the point at which Metro trains travelling north emerge from the underground section. Trains travel southbound to Sunderland or South Shields via city centre and Gateshead and northbound to the airport via Kingston Park or Whitley Bay.


== Religion ==
There has been an active Bahá’í community in Jesmond for over 25 years, Jesmond is also home to the only Bahá’í Centre in North East England, located on Victoria Square near the civic centre.
One of the largest evangelical Anglican churches in the UK is Jesmond Parish Church, which is affiliated with the controversial Christian Institute (based in nearby Gosforth), and has attracted several pickets, particularly over its stance opposing active homosexuality.


== Nightlife ==
Due to a rising population of students and young professionals, Osborne Road has in recent years become a popular venue for nightlife, eating and socialising. With a large number of bars and restaurants in one location it can become congested on busy nights. The road also has a number of medium-sized hotels.


== References ==


== External links ==
JesmondLocal: Hyperlocal news site covering Jesmond
Newcastle Council Ward Info: North Jesmond.
Newcastle Council Ward Info: South Jesmond
Jesmond Network
What's in Jesmond
JRA