Shanelle Workman (born August 3, 1978) is an American actress. She is best known for playing Sarah "Flash" Roberts on the ABC soap opera One Life to Live from February 2003 to January 2004. Currently, Workman lends her voice to "Wendy" in fast food chain Wendy's North American commercials.


== CareerEdit ==
When she was younger she appeared with fellow soap actress Eden Riegel in the Broadway production of Les Misérables.
In 2005, Workman started filming the movie Jump Shot, where she played a student of Ray Liotta.
Workman returned to soaps as Gabriela "Gaby" Moreno Forrester on The Bold and the Beautiful in March 2005 but was let go by the producers of the soap in October 2005 due to storyline purposes and because the character never caught on with viewers.
She provided the voice of Caren Velázquez from the video game Dino Crisis 3, Pasadena O'Possum in Crash Tag Team Racing, Jennifer Willis in Splatterhouse (2010), as well as the leading role as the voice of Milliarde in the GameCube game Baten Kaitos Origins. She also played the role of Larxene in Kingdom Hearts: Re:Chain of Memories, Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days and Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix. She also provided the voice for the character Alestia Lallis in Mass Effect.
Workman owns GrayStudiosLA with her husband, David Barry Gray.


== Personal lifeEdit ==
Workman is the older sister of actor Jimmy Workman and actress Ariel Winter. On September 9, 2007, Workman married actor David Barry Gray. The couple have two daughters, Skylar Athena (born in May 2009) and Parker Eleni.
On October 3, 2012, Workman became the temporary guardian of her younger sister, following allegations of Winter's physical and emotional abuse at the hands of their mother. Workman has filed a guardianship petition, seeking permanent guardianship over Winter. In her youth, Workman was removed from her mother's care after similar allegations.
On May 5, 2014, the court ordered permanent guardianship to Workman and removed Winter from her mother's guardianship permanently. Workman and Winter's mother later released a statement stating "The family has moved beyond the conflict." 


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Shanelle Workman at the Internet Movie Database
GrayStudiosLA Website
Shanelle Workman profile on SoapCentral
2003 soaptownusa.com interview
Shanelle Gray Kingdom Hearts Interview