Cognitive biases are tendencies to think in certain ways that can lead to systematic deviations from a standard of rationality or good judgment, and are often studied in psychology and behavioral economics.
Although the reality of these biases is confirmed by replicable research, there are often controversies about how to classify these biases or how to explain them. Some are effects of information-processing rules (i.e. mental shortcuts), called heuristics, that the brain uses to produce decisions or judgments. Such effects are called cognitive biases. Biases have a variety of forms and appear as cognitive ("cold") bias, such as mental noise, or motivational ("hot") bias, such as when beliefs are distorted by wishful thinking. Both effects can be present at the same time.
There are also controversies as to whether some of these biases count as useless, irrational or whether they result in useful attitudes or behavior. For example, when getting to know others, people tend to ask leading questions which seem biased towards confirming their assumptions about the person. This kind of confirmation bias has been argued to be an example of social skill: a way to establish a connection with the other person.
The research on these biases overwhelmingly involves human subjects. However, some of the findings have appeared in non-human animals as well. For example, hyperbolic discounting has been observed in rats, pigeons, and monkeys.


== Decision-making, belief, and behavioral biasesEdit ==
Many of these biases affect belief formation, business and economic decisions, and human behavior in general. They arise as a replicable result to a specific condition: when confronted with a specific situation, the deviation from what is normally expected can be characterized by:


== Social biasesEdit ==
Most of these biases are labeled as attributional biases.


== Memory errors and biasesEdit ==

In psychology and cognitive science, a memory bias is a cognitive bias that either enhances or impairs the recall of a memory (either the chances that the memory will be recalled at all, or the amount of time it takes for it to be recalled, or both), or that alters the content of a reported memory. There are many types of memory bias, including:


== Common theoretical causes of some cognitive biasesEdit ==
Bounded rationality – limits on optimization and rationality
Prospect theory
Mental accounting
Adaptive bias – basing decisions on limited information and biasing them based on the costs of being wrong.

Attribute substitution – making a complex, difficult judgment by unconsciously substituting it by an easier judgment
Attribution theory
Salience
Naïve realism

Cognitive dissonance, and related:
Impression management
Self-perception theory

Heuristics in judgment and decision making, including:
Availability heuristic – estimating what is more likely by what is more available in memory, which is biased toward vivid, unusual, or emotionally charged examples
Representativeness heuristic – judging probabilities on the basis of resemblance
Affect heuristic – basing a decision on an emotional reaction rather than a calculation of risks and benefits

Some theories of emotion such as:
Two-factor theory of emotion
Somatic markers hypothesis

Introspection illusion
Misinterpretations or misuse of statistics; innumeracy.
A 2012 Psychological Bulletin article suggested that at least eight seemingly unrelated biases can be produced by the same information-theoretic generative mechanism that assumes noisy information processing during storage and retrieval of information in human memory.


== Individual differences in decision making biasesEdit ==
People do appear to have stable individual differences in their susceptibility to decision biases such as overconfidence, temporal discounting, and bias blind spot. That said, these stable levels of bias within individuals are possible to change. Participants in experiments who watched training videos and played debiasing games showed medium to large reductions both immediately and up to three months later in the extent to which they exhibited susceptibility to six cognitive biases: anchoring, bias blind spot, confirmation bias, fundamental attribution error, projection bias, and representativeness.


== DebiasingEdit ==

Debiasing is the reduction of biases in judgment and decision making through incentives, nudges, and training.


== See alsoEdit ==


== NotesEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==