Gentlemen Are Born is a 1934 American drama film directed by Alfred E. Green and starring Franchot Tone.
The film's pre-release title was Just Out of College. A news item in Daily Variety notes that Warner Bros. was sued for $250,000 by Ronald Wagoner and James F. Wickizer who contended that the film was based on their story "Yesterday's Heroes."


== Plot ==
Four friends, Bob Bailey (Tone), Tom Martin (Ross Alexander), Smudge Casey (Dick Foran) and Fred Harper (Robert Light), are certain that upon their graduation from college, they will conquer the world. They face disappointment when they look for jobs, however. Because of the Depression, jobs are scarce and each one has many applicants.
Fred goes to work for his father, Mr. Harper (Henry O'Neill), a prominent stockbroker. Eventually Bob, who intends to become a journalist, manages to sell occasional articles to the newspaper, and Tom also finds work. Smudge, a star athlete, unsuccessfully looks for work as a coach. Tom is in love with Trudy Talbot (Jean Muir), who moves to New York to be near him. She shares a room with Susan Merrill (Ann Dvorak), a librarian. Tom invites Bob to double date with him and Trudy, hoping that he will become interested in Susan, but Bob is in love with Fred's sister Joan Harper (Margaret Lindsay), even though they are of different social classes. When Bob attends a boxing match on assignment from the paper, he sees Smudge fighting for a few dollars.
Realizing that Smudge is broke, Susan and Bob invite him for Sunday breakfast. Soon Susan and Smudge fall in love. Shortly after, Tom and Trudy marry, as do Susan and Smudge. Joan and Bob date despite her mother's wishes that she only go out with men of her class. Smudge is fired from his job as a truck driver because there is not enough work and Susan loses her job because she is married. Meanwhile, Tom and Trudy have a baby. Mr. Harper is implicated in a trust failure and kills himself, leaving his family in reduced circumstances. For this reason, Joan decides to accept a proposal from wealthy Stephen Hornblow (Charles Starrett), even though she is in love with Bob.
Completely desperate, Smudge robs a pawnshop of ten dollars in order to buy food and he is shot running away. Bob keeps his identity out of the papers and Susan returns to her parents. When Joan meets Bob at Tom and Trudy's, where they have gone to visit the new baby, she confesses that she is not going to give up her life to support her family. Instead she will follow her heart and marry Bob.


== Cast ==
Franchot Tone as Bob Bailey
Jean Muir as Trudy Talbot
Margaret Lindsay as Joan Harper
Ann Dvorak as Susan Merrill
Ross Alexander as Tom Martin
Dick Foran as Smudge Casey
Charles Starrett as Stephen Hornblow
Russell Hicks as Editor
Robert Light as Fred Harper
Addison Richards as Martinson
Henry O'Neill as Mr. Harper
Arthur Aylesworth as Mr. Gillespie
Marjorie Gateson as Mrs. Harper
Bradley Page as Al
Edward Mosbar as Tom Texas
Virginia Howell as Miss Graham
James Burtis as Moe


== References ==


== External links ==
Gentlemen Are Born at the Internet Movie Database