Nestlé Crunch is the name of a chocolate bar made of milk chocolate with crisped rice mixed in, produced by Nestlé. Nestlé Crunch was first introduced to market in 1928. Its current slogan is, "Munch Now. Munch Some Later." It was first introduced in 1937.
Nestlé discontinued the traditional packaging technique of wrapping the bar in aluminum foil, sleeved inside a paper label, in favor of more conventional packaging practices, most likely due to the excessive time it took in double-packaging the bar. The chocolate bar can now commonly be found in a single-ply inner metallised boPET polyester film, typical of convenience foods packaging.
In 1994, Nestlé Crunch was Nestlé's best-selling candy bar.


== Additional products ==
Besides the chocolate bar, Nestlé also produces other Nestlé Crunch products:
Buncha Crunch are candy pieces made of milk chocolate with crisped rice mixed in. They were originally only sold exclusively in movie theaters, but of May 2012 they have become available in most grocery stores.
Nestlé Crunch White is a candy bar made with white chocolate instead of milk chocolate.
Nestlé Crunch Ice Cream Bars have a firm, vanilla-flavoured ice cream center, surrounded by a milk chocolate coating with crisped rice mixed in.
Nestlé Crunch with Caramel is a candy bar made with milk chocolate and crisped rice mixed in, containing a caramel center.
Nestlé Crunch with Peanuts is a limited edition candy bar made with milk chocolate and crisped rice mixed in, containing peanuts.
Dark Nestlé Crunch with Caramel is a limited edition candy bar made with dark chocolate and crisped rice mixed in, containing a caramel center.
Nestlé Crunch Stixx is a variant of Nestlé Crunch, which consists of wafers and Nestlé Crunch Candy Creme
Nestlé Crunch Dark Stixx is a variant of Nestlé Crunch, which consists of wafers and Nestlé Crunch Dark Candy Creme
Nestlé Crunch Mocha is a discontinued candy bar made with mocha instead of milk chocolate.
Nestlé Crunch Crisp is a full size candy bar made with wafers and chocolate creme.
Nestlé Crunch Cereal is chocolate cereal with crispy rice and wheat clusters.
Wonka Bar is also considered as an additional product to the Crunch bar because they are both made by Nestlé, they are both just chocolate bars with Graham Crackers, and they both have a big logo on it


== See also ==
List of chocolate bar brands


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website