Sometimes They Come Back... for More is the second straight-to-video sequel to Sometimes They Come Back. The video was directed by Daniel Zelik Berk and released in 1998.


== PlotEdit ==
The U.S. military has a secret illegal mining operation in Antarctica. When one of the personnel stationed at the base goes on a rampage, two military operatives, Cpt Sam Cage (Clayton Rohner) and Maj Callie Wilson (Chase Masterson) drop in to search the base. They discover two survivors, medical officer Cpt Jennifer Wells (Faith Ford) and technical officer Lt Brian Shebanski (Max Perlich). The base radio is mysteriously smashed.
Going into the mining area of the base, Shebanski sees what appears to be another survivor and starts a chase through the corridors, taking an elevator to the second floor. When Wells collapses because of the gases in the mine he takes her to an elevator, only to discover they are actually on the fourth floor. Back in the main compound they discover that a body they had found in the snow has now moved and is gone. They find dead and dying personnel, and a book about conjuring the Devil. More bodies disappear when nobody's looking, and reappear later as lurching menaces. Soon Jennifer and Sam find themselves the only ones still alive, fighting the undead and their diabolical master.


== CastEdit ==
Clayton Rohner as Captain Sam Cage
Faith Ford as Dr. Jennifer Wells
Max Perlich as Lieutenant Brian Shebanski
Chase Masterson as Major Callie O'Grady
Damian Chapa as Dr. Carl Schilling
Jennifer O'Dell as Mary
Michael Stadvec as Captain Robert Reynolds
Stephen Hart as Major Frank Whittaker
Douglas Stoup as Lieutenant Baines
Frank Ceglia as Soldier in Bar


== External linksEdit ==
Sometimes They Come Back... for More at the Internet Movie Database
Sometimes They Come Back... for More at the TCM Movie Database
Sometimes They Come Back... for More at AllMovie


== See alsoEdit ==
Project Iceworm - a top-secret United States Army program during the Cold War to build a network of mobile nuclear missile launch sites under the Greenland ice sheet.