The United States Army Tank Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center (TARDEC), located in Warren, Michigan, is the US Armed Forces' research and development facility for advanced technology in ground systems. It is part of the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), a major subordinate command of the United States Army Materiel Command. TARDEC shares its facilities with the U.S. Army TACOM Life Cycle Management Command (TACOM LCMC). Current technology focus areas include Ground Vehicle Power and Mobility (GVPM), Ground System Survivability and Force Protection Technology, among others.


== Laboratories ==
It features a number of research laboratories including a:
Laser Protection Laboratory
Crew Station Systems Integration Laboratory
Robotic Systems Integration Laboratory
Ground Vehicle Simulation Laboratory – ride motion simulator, pintle motion based simulator, crew station/turret motion based simulator and several vehicle “shaker” facilities
High Performance Computing Laboratory – supports virtual prototyping and design development of combat vehicles and improves virtual reality capabilities
Next Generation Software Laboratory
Water Laboratory
Petroleum Laboratory – researches properties and durability of a wide-range of fuel including JP-8, diesel, hydraulic fluids and lubricants
Bridging Simulation Laboratory – Located at Selfridge Air National Guard base, this facility features computer controlled load test areas with automated data acquisition capability for structural testing of bridging systems. Lab capabilities include static and dynamic structural load application for structural and fatigue testing.
Propulsion Test Laboratory
Physical and Rapid Prototyping Laboratory
Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Center – researches a variety of alternative vehicle structural materials, including composite materials
Center for Ground Vehicle Development and Integration (CGVDI)
Ground Vehicle Power and Systems Engineering Laboratory (GSPEL) (OPENED APRIL 2012)
Power and Energy Vehicle Environment Laboratory (PEVEL)
Fuel Cell Research Laboratory
Energy Storage Laboratory
Air Filtration Laboratory
Electric Components Laboratory
Power Laboratory
Thermal Management Laboratory
Calorimeter Laboratory


== Fuel Efficient Ground Vehicle Demonstrator ==
TARDEC is designing fuel efficient vehicles that integrate a wide variety of technologies to demonstrate the state-of-the-art in fuel efficient vehicle design.

The FED's objectives include:
Identifying and assessing technologies that support increasing fuel efficiency and reducing fuel consumption for light tactical vehicles.
Developing and assessing fuel efficient tactical vehicle concepts that compare favorably and achieve the same operational capabilities of a Humvee.
Developing, fabricating, and testing two system-level demonstrators that incorporate fuel-efficient technologies. The two demonstrator vehicles are named "Alpha" and "Bravo".
Training the next generation of government engineers in fuel efficiency processes and tools.
FED "Alpha" completed fabrication in October 2010. FED Alpha is powered by a Super/Turbocharged 200 Hp 4.5L Inline 4-Cylinder Diesel Engine optimized for fuel efficiency. Alpha also includes other fuel saving subsystems such as an integrated starter generator, lightweight hull/frame, low rolling resistance tires, driver feedback systems, solar panels, low-drag brakes, superfinishing of driveline components, and other technologies. FED Alpha will undergo performance testing starting in early 2011.
FED "Bravo" is currently finishing its detailed design phase and will begin fabrication in early 2011. Bravo will have a road-coupled parallel hybrid powertrain. FED Bravo is scheduled to begin performance testing in late 2011.


== Electric vehicles ==
TARDEC has acquired PowerGenix NiZn batteries for military hybrid electric vehicles.


== See also ==
Humvee
Intelligent Ground Vehicle Competition
Lawrence Technological University
List of U.S. military vehicles by model number
Medium Mine Protected Vehicle
MillenWorks Light Utility Vehicle
Multi Autonomous Ground-robotic International Challenge
Office of Naval Research
Plug-in vehicle
RDECOM


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Sources ===
govinfo.library.unt.edu