Active volcanoes in the Philippines, as categorized by the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), include volcanoes in the country having erupted within historical times (within the last 600 years), with accounts of these eruptions documented by man; or having erupted within the last 10,000 years (holocene) based on analyses of datable materials. However, there is no consensus among volcanologists on how to define an "active" volcano. As of 2012, PHIVOLCS lists 23 volcanoes as active in the Philippines, 21 of which have historical eruptions, one strongly fumarolic volcano - Cabalian - and Leonard Kniaseff with activity dated 1800BP (C14).; the Smithsonian Institution's Global Volcanism Program categories 20 Philippine volcanoes as "historical" and 59 as "holocene".
The Smithsonian Institution's Global Volcanism Program (GVP) list volcanoes with historical, Holocene eruptions, or possibly older if strong signs of volcanism are still evident through thermal features like fumaroles, hot springs, mud pots, etc. GVP currently lists 50 Philippines volcanoes. The eruptions from the table below were based more on GVP which gives a more detailed eruption history for a particular mountain. The frequency of Historical Eruptions are based on definite historical eruptions and excludes questionable or Uncertain accounts based on the two sources mentioned.
The list below shows 25 active volcanoes in the Philippines was based more on the PHIVOLCS list with some included from the GVP list. The number is not a definite number and could depend on someone's definition of "active" or historical timeframe. Also, volcanoes listed as inactive or potentially active could renew activity after long periods of dormancy such as Mount Pinatubo in 1991.


== Active volcanoes in the PhilippinesEdit ==


== See alsoEdit ==
List of potentially active volcanoes in the Philippines
List of inactive volcanoes in the Philippines
Geomorphology
Landforms
Volcanic field
List of mountains in the Philippines


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
PHIVOLCS Volcano Monitoring and Classification of Volcanoes