Firs (Abies) are a genus of 48–56 species of evergreen coniferous trees in the family Pinaceae. They are found through much of North and Central America, Europe, Asia, and North Africa, occurring in mountains over most of the range. Firs are most closely related to the genus Cedrus (cedar). Douglas firs are not true firs, being of the genus Pseudotsuga.
They are large trees, reaching heights of 10–80 m (33–262 ft) tall and trunk diameters of 0.5–4 m (1 ft 8 in–13 ft 1 in) when mature. Firs can be distinguished from other members of the pine family by the unique attachment of their needle-like leaves and by their different cones.
Identification of the different species is based on the size and arrangement of the leaves, the size and shape of the cones, and whether the bract scales of the cones are long and exserted, or short and hidden inside the cone.


== LeavesEdit ==

Firs can be distinguished from other members of the pine family by the unique attachment of their needle-like leaves to the twig by a base that resembles a small suction cup.
The leaves are significantly flattened, sometimes even looking like they are pressed, as in A. sibirica.
The leaves have two whitish strips on the bottom, each of which is formed by wax-covered stomatal bands. The upper surface of the leaves usually is uniformly green and shiny, without stomata or only with few at their tips, visible as whitish spots. Some of the species however have the upper surface of leaves dull, gray-green, bluish-gray to silvery, coated by wax with variable number of stomatal bands, and not always continuous. An example species with shiny green leaves is A. alba, and an example species with dull waxy leaves is A. concolor.
The tips of leaves are usually more or less notched (as in A. firma), but sometimes rounded or dull (as in A. concolor, A. magnifica) or sharp and prickly (as in A. bracteata, A. cephalonica, A. holophylla). The leaves of young plants are usually sharper.
The way they spread from the shoot is very diverse, only in some species comb-shaped, with the leaves arranged on two sides, flat (A. alba) 


== ConesEdit ==

Firs differ from other conifers in having erect, cylindrical cones 5–25 cm (2.0–9.8 in) long that disintegrate at maturity to release the winged seeds.
In contrast to spruces, even large fir cones do not hang, but are raised like candles.
Mature cones are usually brown, young in summer can be green, for example:
A. grandis, A. holophylla, A. nordmanniana
or purple and blue, sometimes very dark:
A. fraseri, A. homolepis (var. umbellata green), A. koreana ('Flava' green), A. lasiocarpa, A. nephrolepis (f. chlorocarpa green), A. sibirica, A. veitchii (var. olivacea green). 


== ClassificationEdit ==
Section Abies (central, south & east Europe, Asia Minor)
Abies alba—silver fir
Abies nebrodensis—Sicilian fir
Abies borisii-regis—Bulgarian fir
Abies cephalonica—Greek fir
Abies nordmanniana—Nordmann fir or Caucasian fir
Abies nordmanniana subsp. equi-trojani—Kazdağı fir, Turkish fir
Abies nordmanniana subsp. bornmülleriana—Uludağ fir

Abies pinsapo—Spanish fir
Abies pinsapo var. marocana—Moroccan fir

Abies numidica—Algerian fir
Abies cilicica—Syrian fir

Section Balsamea (Taiga|boreal Asia and North America, and high mountains further south)
Abies fraseri—Fraser fir
Abies balsamea—balsam fir
Abies balsamea var. phanerolepis—bracted balsam fir

Abies lasiocarpa—subalpine fir
Abies lasiocarpa var. arizonica—corkbark fir
Abies lasiocarpa var. bifolia—Rocky Mountains subalpine fir

Abies sibirica—Siberian fir
Abies sibirica var. semenovii—

Abies sachalinensis—Sakhalin fir
Abies koreana—Korean fir
Abies nephrolepis—Khinghan fir
Abies veitchii—Veitch's fir
Abies veitchii var. sikokiana—Shikoku fir

Section Grandis (western North America to Mexico and Guatemala, lowlands in north, moderate altitudes in south)
Abies grandis—grand fir or giant fir
Abies grandis var. idahoensis—interior grand fir or giant fir

Abies concolor—white fir
Abies concolor subsp. lowiana—Low's white fir

Abies durangensis—Durango fir
Abies durangensis var. coahuilensis—Coahuila fir

Abies flinckii—Jalisco fir
Abies guatemalensis—Guatemalan fir

Section Momi (east & central Asia, Himalaya, generally at low to moderate altitudes)
Abies kawakamii—Taiwan fir
Abies homolepis—Nikko fir
Abies recurvata—Min fir
Abies recurvata var. ernestii—Min fir

Abies firma—Momi fir
Abies beshanzuensis—Baishanzu fir
Abies holophylla—Manchurian fir
Abies chensiensis—Shensi fir
Abies chensiensis subsp. salouenensis—Salween fir

Abies pindrow—Pindrow fir
Abies ziyuanensis—Ziyuan fir

Section Amabilis (Pacific coast mountains, North America and Japan, in high rainfall mountains)
Abies amabilis—Pacific silver fir
Abies mariesii—Maries' fir

Section Pseudopicea (Sino-Himalayan mountains, at high altitude)
Abies delavayi—Delavay's fir
Abies delavayi var. nukiangensis—
Abies delavayi var. motuoensis—
Abies delavayi subsp. fansipanensis—

Abies fabri—Faber's fir
Abies fabri subsp. minensis—

Abies forrestii—Forrest's fir
Abies densa—Bhutan fir
Abies spectabilis—East Himalayan fir
Abies fargesii— Farges' fir
Abies fanjingshanensis—Fanjingshan fir
Abies yuanbaoshanensis—Yuanbaoshan fir
Abies squamata—flaky fir

Section Oiamel (Central Mexico, at high altitude)
Abies religiosa—sacred fir
Abies hickelii—Hickel's fir
Abies hickelii var. oaxacana—Oaxaca fir

Section Nobilis (western U.S., high altitudes)
Abies procera—noble fir
Abies magnifica—red fir
Abies magnifica var. shastensis—Shasta red fir

Section Bracteata (California coast)
Abies bracteata—bristlecone fir

Section Incertae sedis
Abies milleri—(Extinct) Early Eocene


== Uses and ecologyEdit ==
Wood of most firs is considered unsuitable for general timber use, and is often used as pulp or for the manufacture of plywood and rough timber. Because this genus has no insect or decay resistance qualities after logging, it is generally recommended for construction purposes as indoor use only (e.g. indoor drywall on framing). This wood left outside cannot be expected to last more than 12 to 18 months, depending on the type of climate it is exposed to. It is commonly referred to by several different names, including North American timber, SPF (spruce, pine, fir) and whitewood.
Nordmann fir, noble fir, Fraser fir and balsam fir are popular Christmas trees, generally considered to be the best for this purpose, with aromatic foliage that does not shed many needles on drying out. Many are also decorative garden trees, notably Korean fir and Fraser fir, which produce brightly coloured cones even when very young, still only 1–2 m (3.3–6.6 ft) tall. Other firs can grow anywhere between 30 and 236 feet (9.1 and 71.9 m) tall. Fir Tree Appreciation Day is June 18.
Firs are used as food plants by the caterpillars of some Lepidoptera species, including Chionodes abella (recorded on white fir), autumnal moth, conifer swift (a pest of balsam fir), the engrailed, grey pug, mottled umber, pine beauty and the tortrix moths Cydia illutana (whose caterpillars are recorded to feed on European silver fir cone scales) and C. duplicana (on European silver fir bark around injuries or canker).
Abies spectabilis or Talispatra is used in Ayurveda as an antitussive drug.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== BibliographyEdit ==
Philips, Roger. Trees of North America and Europe, Random House, Inc., New York ISBN 0-394-50259-0, 1979.


== External linksEdit ==
Abies at The Gymnosperm Database
Michael P. FRANKIS CONE COLLECTION: Abies at the Arboretum de Villardebelle—images of cones of selected species

^ Platt, Karen "Gold Fever" provides descriptions of golden or yellow-leaved Abies cultivars http://www.karenplatt.co.uk