This is a list of characters for the Skylanders video game and toy franchise. The first game in the series, Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure, was released in 2011, and it has received four sequels: Skylanders: Giants, Skylanders: Swap Force, Skylanders: Trap Team, and Skylanders: SuperChargers.


== SkylandersEdit ==
The Skylanders are the legendary heroes and the protectors of Skylands, a magical world that has floating islands in the sky. Using their magical powers and machinery, the Skylanders defended Skylands for generations from various threats. For generations, the Skylanders worked with the Portal Masters in keeping peace and balance in their world, battling the forces of darkness, and protecting the Core of Light. The Skylanders have an unbreakable bond with their Portal Masters. Though they are not servants, the Skylanders chose to serve their Portal Master and do so eagerly. Each Skylander is associated with one of the ten elements of Skylands: Earth, Air, Fire, Water, Life, Undead, Magic, Dark, Light or Tech.


=== Spyro the DragonEdit ===

Spyro (voiced by Josh Keaton) is a magic-elemental purple Dragon from the Spyro the Dragon franchise who is the leader of the Core Skylanders. His catchphrase is "All Fired Up!". Hailing from a line of rare magical purple dragons, Spyro has been a devoted battler for good and embarked on many adventures. His heroism and exploits has been chronicled by the old Portal Masters and the Ancients until Master Eon finally reached out and invited Spyro to become of Skylands' most valued protectors. He was the one who inspired Lightning Rod to join the Skylanders.
Spyro the Dragon also had other versions of himself:
Legendary Spyro – A dark blue and gold version of Series 1 Spyro that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Dark Spyro – A dark version of Spyro that is an exclusive to the 3DS package. He was later made available for a limited time at Tesco in a SinglePack. The catchphrase of this version of Spyro is "Lights Out!"
Mega Ram Spyro – His Series 3 name.
Dark Mega Ram Spyro – The Dark Spyro version of Mega Ram Spyro.


=== Core SkylandersEdit ===
Besides Spyro, the following are the normal members of the Skylanders:


==== Air SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Air element have balanced fighting styles with powers that mostly relate the wind.
Blades (voiced by Robin Atkin Downes) – An air-elemental dragon with wings covered in razors that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Looking Sharp!". Blades came from a long line of dragons that guarded the dungeon of Scalos Castle where the Golden Fear Serpent had slumbered for a century. He was able to defeat the Golden Fear Serpent by confronting his fear. Word of Blades' bravery reached Master Eon who recruited Blades into the Skylanders.
Legendary Blades – A dark blue and gold version of Blades that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Fling Kong (voiced by Nick Shakoour) - An air-elemental Monkey who rides a Flying Carpet that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Monkey See, Monkey Doom!". Fling Kong is an expert in the art of Monk-Ru (a form of fighting using the power of air). After he protected the legendary monkey idol Kubla-Wu from the Gorilla-Goos, Fling Kong was approached by Master Eon who recruited him into the Skylanders army.
Jet-Vac (voiced by Greg Ellis in a Scottish accent in the US version, Ally McCrae in the UK version) – An air-elemental Sky Baron. He makes his debut in Skylanders: Giants. His catchphrase is "Hawk and Awe!" Jet-Vac gave up his wings so that a mother could get away from the invaders. Upon hearing about Jet-Vac's sacrifice, Master Eon recruited Jet-Vac into the Skylanders army and gave him a vacuum-powered jet pack to make up for his lost wings. Jet-Vac was the one who recruited Scratch into the Skylander ranks after hearing about her heroism at Cats Eye Mountain.
Lightcore Jet-Vac – A lightcore version of him.
Legendary Jet-Vac – A dark blue and gold version of Series 1 Jet-Vac that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Turbo Jet-Vac – His Series 2 name.
Full Blast Jet-Vac – His Series 3 name.
Hurricane Jet-Vac - His SuperCharger form. In this form, Jet-Vac's signature vehicle is the Jet Stream.

Lightning Rod (voiced by Alex Ness) – An air-elemental Storm Giant. His catchphrase is "One Strike and You're Out!". Lightning Rod is the celebrated champion of the Storm Giants. He was recruited into the Skylanders Army by Spyro and Master Eon after repelling Kaos' army from his land.
Pop Thorn (voiced by Chris Edgerly) – An air-elemental Pufferthorn that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Straight to the Point!" Pop Thorn's kind were used as combs to Giant Trolls until the day Pop Thorn stood up to them which was enough for Master Eon to recruit Pop Thorn into the Skylanders Army.
Scratch (voiced by Kathryn Cressida) – An air-elemental Sphinx that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. Her catchphrase is "The Luck of the Claw!". Scratch came from the Cat's Eye Mountain where she played in the clouds there. Upon Scratch fending off the Pirate Greebles, she was discovered by Jet-Vac who recruited Scratch into the Skylanders.
Sonic Boom (voiced by Lani Minella in 2012) – An air-elemental Griffin. Her catchphrase is "Full Scream Ahead!". While residing in the highest mountains, Sonic Boom had laid her eggs which were then cursed by an evil wizard in an invisibility cloak. Now the babies can only break from their for mere minutes before returning to one of their eggs trapped in an endless cycle of rebirth. With her babies briefly coming out of their eggs where they were trained to fight, Sonic Boom joined the Skylanders in order to help eliminate evil wizards.
Warnado (voiced by Fred Tatasciore in 2012) – An air-elemental spiky-shelled Turtle. His catchphrase is "For the Wind!". He was once an ordinary turtle until an enchanted tornado picked him up which gave him the ability to spin around. Warnado's spinning attracted the attention of Whirlwind who brought him to Master Eon. Warnado was convinced to stay still long enough for Master Eon to recruit him into the Skylanders.
Lightcore Warnado – A lightcore version of him.

Whirlwind (voiced by Salli Saffioti in 2012) – An air-elemental Unicorn/Dragon hybrid who was the result of a union between a dragon and a unicorn. Her catchphrase is "Twists of Fury!" While she was disliked by dragons and unicorns, they changed their opinions about her when she saved them from some Trolls. After the dragons and unicorns saw her in a new light, Whirlwind was recruited by Master Eon to join the Skylanders. Whirlwind was the one who discovered Warnado.
Polar Whirlwind – A white version of Whirlwind that is a GameStop exclusive release.
Horn Blast Whirlwind – Her Series 3 name.


==== Dark SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Dark element use the power of darkness to overpower their foes. Although the Dark Element disappeared when the Core of Light was destroyed leaving the creatures associated with it trapped in the Dark Realm, it reappeared after the massive explosion that destroyed Cloudcracker Prison.
Blackout (voiced by Ogie Banks) – A dark-elemental Black Dragon. He is the first Dark-elemental Skylander who debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Darkness Falls!". Growing up in the Realm of Dreams, Blackout was recruited into a dragon clan called the Dark Stygian which is responsible for creating nightmares for evil creatures. When the Dark Stygian began to abuse their power and spread their nightmares for their own amusement, Blackout took a stand and teleported into the nightmares the Dark Stygian created and defeat the creatures within them. After helping Blackout stop the Dark Stygian, Master Eon made him a member of the Skylanders.


==== Earth SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Earth element manipulate the soil and the earth itself against their enemies.
Bash (voiced by Keith Silverstein) – An earth-elemental flightless Rock Dragon. His catchphrase is "Rock and Roll!" Bash was obsessed with wanting to fly and has rolled himself up in order to get the speed to do so. When Bash had saved his friends from an airship that abducted them, he was recruited by Master Eon to join the Skylanders. Bash was later responsible for discovering Flashwing (where Bash developed a crush on her).
Legendary Bash – A dark blue and gold version of Series 1 Bash that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Dino-Rang (voiced by Thomas Bromhead in 2012) – An earth-elemental, boomerang-throwing Dinosauroid, His catchphrase is "Come Rang or Shine!". He came from another world until he was brought to Skylands by evil wizards. Dino-Rang managed to fight them off. While looking for the Twin Diamond Boomerangs that would take him home, Dino-Rang found Master Eon who recruited him into the Skylanders.
Fist Bump (voiced by Travis Willingham) – An earth-elemental Rock Panda Skylander that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Knock, Knock... Too Late!" He has a pair of mace-like fists that gives him both his strength and his name. Fist Bump was the sleeping protector of the Bubbling Bamboo Forest until he was awoken by an attack from Pirate Greebles. After Fist Bump fought off the Pirate Greebles, he was discovered by Terrafin who brought him to Master Eon leading to Fist Bump joining the Skylanders.
Flashwing (voiced by Tara Strong) – An earth-elemental Gem Dragon. She makes her debut in Skylanders: Giants. Her catchphrase is "Blinded by the Light!" Flashwing emerged from a shooting star where she met Bash (who would develop a crush on her). Bash was able to get Flashwing into the Skylanders.
Lightcore Flashwing – A lightcore version of her.
Jade Flashwing – A green variant of Flashwing.

Prism Break (voiced by Peter Lurie in 2012) – An earth-elemental Crystal Golem. His catchphrase is "The Beam is Supreme!" He was originally a normal Rock Golem until he became a Crystal Golem upon sleeping for 100 years. Prism Break was awoken by Mabu miners. Finding himself improved, he was able to join the Skylanders.
Lightcore Prism Break – A lightcore version of him.
Hyper Beam Prism Break – His Series 3 name.

Rocky Roll (voiced by Billy West) - An earth-elemental Rock Digger named Rocky who rides on a giant boulder named Roll. They debut in Skylanders: Trap Team. Rocky's catchphrase is "Roll With It!" While Rocky wanted to make a difference, Roll wanted to see the world which led to the two of them traveling together. After many adventures together, Rocky Roll met Master Eon who recruited them into the Skylanders upon seeing their special connection.
Scorp (voiced by Rino Romano) – An earth-elemental Rock Scorpion that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "King of the Sting!" Scorp was raised in the Salt Flat Islands where he became an expert in Sting Ball. When a spell to make it rain with the enchanted water gem used by the opposing team went horribly wrong, Scorp used his claws to battle the rising water in order to dispose of the enchanted water gem. Afterwards, Scorp sought out the Skylanders and joined up with them.
Slobber Tooth (voiced by Dave Fennoy) – An earth-elemental Turtle/Dinosaur hybrid that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Clobber and Slobber!" Slobber Tooth was fast asleep for thousands of years until he was awoken by a volcanic eruption. Kaos wanted to recruit Slobber Tooth to his army only for Slobber Tooth to go his own path. Upon defending his hibernating race and his land from Kaos' army, he was approached by Master Eon who recruited him into the Skylanders.
Dark Slobber Tooth – His dark version.

Terrafin (voiced by Joey Camen in 2012) – An earth-elemental humanoid Dirt Shark. His catchphrase is "It's Feeding Time". Terrafin came from the Dirt Sea where he first worked as a lifeguard. After an explosion turned the entire area into glass, Terrafin was unemployed and became a boxer. Following some undefeated matches, Terrafin retired from boxing and was approached by Master Eon to join the Skylanders. Terrafin was also the one who discovered Drill Sergeant and Fist Bump.
Knockout Terrafin – His Series 3 name.
Shark Shooter Terrafin - His SuperCharger form. In this form, his signature vehicle is the Shark Tank.


==== Fire SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Fire element uses the manipulation of fire to burn down and sear their foes.
Eruptor (voiced by Keythe Farley in 2012) – A fire-elemental Lava Monster that barfs lava. His catchphrase is "Born to Burn!" Eruptor came from the sweltering underground caverns of an unknown volcanic island until the volcano exploded from a fight at a lava pool party sending all the Lava Monsters across Skylands. After his fights against Kaos' forces, Eruptor was approached by Master Eon to join the Skylanders.
Lightcore Eruptor – A lightcore version of him.
Lava Barf Eruptor – His Series 3 name.
Volcanic Eruptor – A black variant of Lava Barf Eruptor that included in the 3DS starter pack for Skylanders: Swap Force.
Lava Lance Eruptor - His SuperCharger form. In this form, his signature vehicle is the Burn-Cycle.

Flameslinger (voiced by Keith Szarabajka) – A fire-elemental Elf Archer who wears 2 blindfolds over his eyes due to him becoming the talk of the neighboring lands. In one of the trailers, he lifts up his blindfold and there is a second one. His catchphrase is "Let the Flames Begin!" Flameslinger can use the flames as his eyes. When he saved a drowning Fire Spirit, Flameslinger was rewarded by the Fire Spirit who gave him magic fire boots for lightning speed and an enchanted bow that shoots fire arrows. Following some archery contest victories, Flameslinger was approached by Master Eon and the rest is history.
Fryno (voiced by Robert Cait) – A fire-elemental Rhinoceros Biker that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Crash and Burn!" Fryno started out as a member of a notorious biker gang called the Blazing Biker Brigade. When he learned that the biker gang was bad, Fryno demanded they make amends which resulted in a fight which Fryno won and the Blazing Biker Brigade disbanding. After returning the stolen valuables, Fryno was approached by Master Eon who offered him membership to a new group. The group in question....the Skylanders.
Hog Wild Fryno – His Series 2 name.

Hot Dog (voiced by Carlos Alazraqui) – A fire-elemental Dog that debuts in Skylanders: Giants. His catchphrase is "See Spot Burn!" Hot Dog was born in the belly of the Popcorn Volcano where he erupted and landed in the camp of the Skylanders. After helping the Skylanders on their quest and defeating a lava monster, Hot Dog became a valuable member of the Skylanders....even if he does keep trying to bury Chop Chop when nobody is looking.
Molten Hot Dog – A yellow version of Hot Dog that is a Walmart exclusive. This version also appears in the Walmart-exclusive book Molten Hot Dog's Quiz Quest.
Color Shift Hot Dog – A bronze metallic hued version of Hot Dog was given away by Activision at the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo.
Fire Bone Hot Dog – His Series 2 name.

Ignitor (voiced by Dwight Schultz) – A fire-elemental Fire Spirit Knight who was originally exclusive to the 3DS version, but was later released on console versions. His catchphrase is "Slash and Burn!" Ignatius was once an ordinary Knight who was given a magic suit by a witch in order to fight the Red Dragon. When the Red Dragon breathed fire on him, Ignatius had been tricked where his new suit was made from a cursed steel that bound itself to him trapping him inside where he would forever remain a Fire Spirit. After slaying the Red Dragon, Ignatius became Ignitor where he joined up with the Skylanders and keeps a vengeful eye out for evil witches everywhere.
Legendary Ignitor – A dark blue and gold version of Series Ignitor that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Smolderdash (voiced by Grey DeLisle) – An fire-elemental unspecified creature with a whip made of fire that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. Her catchphrase is "A Blaze of Glory!" Smolderdash has always wanted to be the royal defender of the Fire Temple that is the home of the First Flame (a sacred torch that was ignited by the original Fire Source). After reclaiming the First Flame from Kaos and his army, she declined becoming a royal defender of the First Flame and gained a new goal to fight Kaos as a Skylander.
Lightcore Smolderdash – A lightcore version of her.

Sunburn (voiced by Troy Baker in 2012) – A fire-elemental Phoenix/Dragon hybrid. His catchphrase is "Roast and Toast!" Sunburn was foreshadowed by many soothsayers and psychics. When Sunburn came into the world, he was a target for every thief, bandit, and evil wizard everywhere. Sunburn was eventually approached by Master Eon to join the Skylanders where Sunburn now uses his powers to fight evil everywhere. Of course Sunburn does happen to play teleporting pranks on his teammates.
Torch (voiced by Salli Saffioti) – A fire-elemental humanoid that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. Her catchphrase is "Fire It Up!" During her childhood, Torch helped her grandfather in his job as a Dragon Keeper where she tended to the dragon stables in her village. When an evil Snow Dragon terrorized her village, Torch was the only one to escape. When Torch defeated the Snow Dragon and saved her village, she found that her grandfather was missing leaving his lucky flaming horseshoe behind. Now as a member of the Skylanders, Torch wields her powerful flamethrower as well as her lucky horseshoe in hopes it will one day lead her to the grandfather she had lost.
Trail Blazer (voiced by Yuri Lowenthal) - A fire-elemental Fire Unicorn that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "The Mane Event!" When Trail Blazer came across a Unicorn in a net, he discovered that it was a Unocorn (a magical creature with a Churro Horn that sprinkled enchanted cinnamon throughout Skylands) and freed it. When the Dark Wizards who set the trap returned, they were angry and Trail Blazer fought against them until they were defeated. After realizing his newfound fury could be used to fight evil everywhere, Trail Blazer sought out the Skylanders who immediately welcomed him as a member.


==== Life SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Life element use abilities that create other living things of their own from plants to vines to animated dummies.
Bumble Blast (voiced by David Sobolov) – A life-elemental Beehive with a bee gun that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "The Perfect Swarm!" He was once an ordinary beehive in the Radiant Mountains until he came to live to protect the Super Honey in him from Kaos' army. Following this fight, Bumble Blast became a guardian of nature until the day he joined the Skylanders.
Lightcore Bumble Blast – A lightcore version of him.
Jolly Bumble Blast – A Christmas edition of Bumble Blast.

Camo (voiced by André Sogliuzzo) – A life-elemental Plant/Dragon hybrid. His catchphrase is "Fruit Punch!" Born by the roots of the Tree of Life, Camo specializes in growing ripe fruits and vegetables until the day when Master Eon came to his island. Upon getting acquainted with each other, Master Eon recruited Camo into the Skylanders. On his days off, Camo works as Master Eon's personal gardener.
Thorn Horn Camo – His Series 2 name.

Food Fight (voiced by Billy West) – A life-elemental Artichoke who wields a tomato cannon that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Eat This!" He was born from a byproduct of a troll food experiment that went wrong. After his fights against the Troll Farmers Guild and an army of rogue gnomes, Food Fight was approached by Master Eon to join the Skylanders.
Dark Food Fight – His dark version.

High Five – A life-elemental Dragonfly/Dragon hybrid that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Buzz Off!" High Five was the fifth son of the Royal High Flying Dragonflies and is a skilled racer. After he had defeated the Troll Racing Team who stole the Trophy of Sparx, High Five joined up with the Skylanders.
Shroomboom (voiced by Matthew Moy) – A life-elemental one-eyed Mushroom with a slingshot. He makes his debut in Skylanders: Giants. Shroomboom appears in the Dragonfire Cannon battle pack with Series Two Chop-Chop as well as being in a single pack. His catchphrase is "He Shoots! He Spores!" Shroomboom has a fear of pizza night ever since he was grown in a pizza-topping garden owned by Kaos. After leading his fellow mushrooms out of Kaos' pizza-topping garden, Shroomboom joined the Skylanders where he is still haunted by the smell of mozarella and tomato sauce.
Lightcore Shroomboom – A lightcore version of him.
Sure Shot Shroomboom – His Series 2 name.

Stealth Elf (voiced by Audrey Wasilewski in 2012) – A life-elemental female Ninja Elf with daggers made with dragon fangs that was exclusive to the 3DS version and later released on console versions. Her catchphrase is "Silent, but Deadly!" She was trained in the art of stealth by a stumpy creature who was the Guardian of the Forest. Upon seeing Stealth Elf in action, Master Eon recruited her in the Skylanders.
Legendary Stealth Elf – A dark blue and gold version of Series 2 Stealth Elf that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Ninja Stealth Elf – Her Series 3 name.
Dark Ninja Stealth Elf - A dark version of Ninja Stealth Elf.
Super Shot Stealth Elf - Her SuperCharger form. In this form, her signature vehicle is the Stealth Stinger.

Stump Smash (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) – A life-elemental Ent with mallet-shaped hands. His catchphrase is "Drop the Hammer!" He was once an ordinary tree until it came to life to take down the Lumberjack Trolls that cut him down. Upon investigating the scene of the fight and learning of Stump Smash's sad story, Master Eon recruited Stump Smash into the Skylanders.
Zoo Lou (voiced by Gideon Emery) – A life-elemental Bear Shaman that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Nature Calls!" He joined the Skylanders after he had freed his lands from an army of Trolls where he was discovered by Double Trouble.
Legendary Zoo Lou – A dark blue and gold version of Zoo Lou that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Zook (voiced by Fred Tatasciore in 2012) – A life-elemental bambazooker armed with a bazooka. His series 1 and 2 catchphrase is "Locked and Loaded!" He was once immobile until he became mobile and was encountered by a group of Elves. Zook joined the Skylanders after saving the Elves from a mighty Mountain Troll.


==== Light SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Light element manipulate the light as their method of attack. Although the Light Element disappeared when the Core of Light was destroyed leaving the creatures associated with it trapped in the Light Realm, it reappeared after the massive explosion that destroyed Cloudcracker Prison.
Spotlight (voiced by Misty Lee) – A light-elemental White Dragoness. She is the first Light-elemental Skylander who debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. Her catchphrase is "Time to Shine!" Master Eon discovered Spotlight in the Prismatic Palace when he was looking for the Crystal Orb of Light. Spotlight later helped Master Eon to defend the Core of Light as a Skylander.


==== Magic SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Magic element use the art of sorcery or magical powers to take down their opponents.
Cobra Cadabra (voiced by Sunil Malhotra) – A magic-elemental cobra that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. He plays a pipe flute and is told to be a snake charmer. His catchphrase is "Charmed and Ready!" He was originally an assistant to a magician called The Great Mubini. The Guild of Mysteriously Mad Magic Masters were against Cobra Cadabra using magic until he defeated their Magic Rabbit Enforces. Afterwards, Cobra Cadabra joined the Skylanders.
Déjà Vu (voiced by Betsy Foldes) – An magic-elemental time-controlling humanoid that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. She is armed with a tuning fork and an hour glass for weapons. Her catchphrase is "Did that just Happen?" Déjà Vu gained the power of time control upon working on an improved egg timer and overloading it in order to protect it from falling into the hands of an army of Sea Slugs. Afterwards, Déjà Vu joined the Skylanders.
Legendary Déjà Vu – A dark blue and gold version of Déjà Vu that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Double Trouble (voiced by Alex Ness in 2012) – A magic-elemental witch doctor in a Tiki Mask who has the ability to create small copies of himself and use magic in his staff. His series 1 and 2 catchphrase is "Boom Shock-alaka!". Double Trouble gained the powers to create small copies of himself upon eating the Whispering Water Lily. His work had caught the eyes of Master Eon who recruited him into the Skylanders. Double Trouble was the one who discovered Zoo Lou.
Royal Double Trouble – A purple, red and dark blue version of Double Trouble.

Dune Bug (voiced by Nolan North) – A magic-elemental Beetle that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Can't Beat the Beetle!" He and his kind had protected the powerful secrets of an Arkeyan Tomb that they resided in. Dune Bug gained his magic staff after fending off the evil Sand Mages of Doom and joined up with the Skylanders.
Pop Fizz (voiced by Bobcat Goldthwait) – A magic-elemental Gremlin Alchemist who uses potions to poison enemies, spawn allies, or turn himself in a beastly version of himself after drinking them. He makes his debut in Skylanders: Giants. His catchphrase is "The Motion of the Potion!" Nobody is quite sure who Pop Fizz was before he became an alchemist, least of all Pop Fizz himself. After many years of experimenting with magical potions, his appearance has changed quite significantly. In fact, no one even knows his original color. According to Pop Fizz, the reason he keeps drinking his potion (or soda), is that the effects keeps him on edge, gives him powers, and that it is "soda-licious." He is also one of the few characters who fully understands Double Trouble's language.
Lightcore Pop Fizz – A lightcore version of him.
Punch Pop Fizz – A red version of Pop Fizz included in the 3DS starter pack for Skylanders: Giants.
Super Gulp Pop Fizz – His Series 2 name.
Fizzy Frenzy Pop Fizz – His Series 3 name.
Love Potion Pop Fizz - A Valentine's Day version of Fizzy Frenzy Pop Fizz.
Big Bubble Pop Fizz - His SuperCharger form. In this form, his signature vehicle is the Soda Skimmer.

Star Strike (voiced by Misty Lee) – A magic-elemental Alien Sorceress in a hooded robe with spike-lined fans that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. Her catchphrase is "Shoot for the Stars!" Star Strike came from an unknown world where she was accidentally summoned to the Skylands when Kaos sneezed in the middle of his spell that would banish the Skylanders. She helped the Skylanders defeat Kaos and was approached by Master Eon who gave her membership to the Skylanders.
Lightcore Star Strike – A lightcore version of her.
Enchanted Lightcore Star Strike – A black and white version of Star Strike.

Voodood (voiced by André Sogliuzzo in 2012) – A magic-elemental orc. His catchphrase is "Axe First, Questions Later!" Voodood came from a tribe of Ooga Orcs where he passed their callenge in the Cave of Trials where he gained the Axe Reaver from the Dragon Skeleton and it's skull for his hat. Voodood later joined the Skylanders in order to help them fight the Darkness.
Wrecking Ball (voiced by Ryan Cooper in 2012) – A magic-elemental grub worm. His catchphrase is "Wreck-N-Roll!" He was an ordinary grub worm until he grew too large upon falling into a wizard's magical stew. After this incident happened, Wrecking Ball bounced into Master Eon who evidently felt that the Skylanders could do with a serious stomach among their ranks.


==== Tech SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Tech element are associated with using technology as their weapons.
Boomer (voiced by Joey Camen in 2012) – A tech-elemental, dynamite-throwing Troll. His catchphrase is "Bring the Boom!" Boomer has a habit of throwing dynamite at the sheep to blast them sky high. He started out as an explosives expert for a Troll Army until the General of the Troll Army plotted to have Boomer blow up a dam to flood a nearby village. When the dam was blown up, Boomer threw dynamite at the sheep where they fell into the flood waters and absorbed all the water. Upon hearing of Boomer's heroic efforts, Master Eon approached him and invited him to join the Skylanders so that he can use his explosives to terminate evil.
Chopper (voiced by Dave B. Mitchell) – A tech-elemental Tyrannosaurus in high-tech armor with a helicopter pack called the Gyro-Dino-Exosuit who makes his debut in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Dino Might!" Chopper built the Gyro-Dino-Exosuit to take part in his kind's contest which ended with him saving his entire village from the lava of an erupting volcano. For his heroic actions, Chopper was inducted into the Skylanders.
Countdown (voiced by Richard Tatum) – A tech-elemental bomb that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force with rockets as hands. His catchphrase is "I'm the Bomb!" He has no memory of his creation when he was found frozen in ice by some Yetis. His memory loss happens everytime he explodes even when Master Eon offers his assistance. Until his origin can be traced, Countdown became a member of the Skylanders.
Lightcore Countdown – A lightcore version of him.
Kickoff Countdown – A variant of Countdown with a soccer ball head.

Drill Sergeant (voiced by Thomas Bromhead in 2012) – A tech-elemental, train-shaped Arkeyan Ultron with drills for hands. His catchphrase is "Licensed to Drill!" He was an aparatus of the Arkeyans buried underground until he was reactivated upon Terrafin activating him and brought him to Master Eon. As there were no Arkeyans present, Drill Sergeant joined up with the Skylanders.
Drobot (voiced by Alex Ness) – A tech-elemental Dragon in a robotic suit. His catchphrase is "Blink and Destroy!" Upon crashing onto an island filled with various gadgets, Drobot built himself a robotic suit. Drobot's robotic suit has a vocal synthesizer for a deep sonic boom, laser beam eyes, and can shoot spinning gears. Drobot later left his home and joined up with the Skylanders.
Lightcore Drobot – A lightcore version of him.

Sprocket (voiced by Elizabeth Daily) – A tech-elemental Golding who makes her debut in Skylanders: Giants. Her catchphrase is "The Fix is In!" Sprocket learned her tinkering skills from her uncle until he was captured by Kaos causing her to build her own battlesuit. Although she hasn't found her uncle yet, she has joined up with the Skylanders to fight the forces of the Darkness.
Heavy Duty Sprocket – Her Series 2 name.
Metallic Heavy Duty Sprocket A variant of Heavy Duty Sprocket that is exclusive to Best Buy.

Tread Head (voiced by Sean Schemmel) – An tech-elemental bike-threaded Gremlin Skylander that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Tread and Shred!" Tread Head was an orphan in the Dizzying Dunes who built his own vehicle for style. Even though he lost the race upon protecting the other racers from a troop of Goblins, his fighting skills impressed Master Eon who invited him to join the Skylanders.
Trigger Happy (voiced by Dave Wittenberg in 2012) – A tech-elemental, gun-toting Gremlin and the leader of the Tech Skylanders. His catchphrase is "No Gold, No Glory!" Trigger Happy saved a tough frontier town from a group of bandits. His gold-slinging actions caught the attention of Master Eon who immediately made him a Skylander.
Legendary Trigger Happy – A dark blue and gold version of Series 1 Trigger Happy that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Big Bang Trigger Happy – His Series 3 name.
Springtime Trigger Happy – An Easter version of Big Bang Trigger Happy.
Double Dare Trigger Happy - His SuperCharger form. In this form, his signature vehicle is the Gold Rusher.

Wind-Up (voiced by Bob Bergen) – A tech-elemental wind-up toy that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "All Wound Up!" Wind-Up was created by a toymaker in his enchanted workshop to help keep his massive collection of clocks working. After the toymaker popped out of existence in a freak accident caused by putting hot cocoa in an Arkeyan oven, Wind-Up soon found himself attacked by an invading Cyclops platoon that plans to claim the toymaker's secrets. Upon defeating the Cyclops platoon, Wind-Up joined the Skylanders.


==== Undead SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Undead element use the power of the undead and darkness to aid them in battle.
Bat Spin (voiced by Eliza Schneider) – An undead-elemental female Vampire witch that rides a tornado and is surrounded by bats. She debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. Her catchphrase is "No Rest for the Wicked!" Bat Spin was raised by a flock of bats as a child upon being separated from her parents. Later on in her life, Bat Spin defended her bat flock from an army of Undead Trolls. It's this action that caught the attention of Master Eon who inducted her into the Skylanders.
Chop Chop (voiced by Steven Blum in 2012) – An undead-elemental Arkeyan Skeleton Soldier. His catchphrase is "Slice and Dice!" He was a member of the Arkeyan Elite Guard during the Giants' fight against the Arkeyan King. Following the Arkeyan King's defeat, Chop Chop wandered for centuries until he met Master Eon who invited him to join the Skylanders.
Legendary Chop Chop – A dark blue and gold version of Series 1 Chop Chop that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Twin Blade Chop Chop – His Series 3 name.

Cynder (voiced by Tobie LaSalandra in 2012) – An undead-elemental violet Dragoness who was previously seen in the Spyro the Dragon franchise. Her catchphrase is "Volts and Lightning!". While still in her egg stage, Cynder was taken by the evil Dragon King Malefor to raise as his own. She was freed from Malefor's control by Spyro where she defected to his side. Spyro convinced Master Eon to let Cynder join up with the Skylanders.

Phantom Cynder – Her Series 3 name.

Fright Rider (voiced by Yuri Lowenthal) – An undead-elemental Elf named Rider that rides on a Skeletal Ostrich named Fright. Fright Rider makes his debut in Skylanders: Giants. Fright Rider also has a glow-in-the-dark version exclusive to Argos called Glow-In-The-Dark Fright Rider. His catchphrase is "Fear the Spear!" Fright was once an ordinary ostrich where Rider was banished to the Undead Realm by a jealous competitor. Upon eating skele-oats, Fright entered the Undead Realm and rescued Rider. Once free, the two of them met Master Eon and defend the Skylands as a member of the Skylanders.
Funny Bone (voiced by Scott Whyte) – An undead-elemental Skeletal Dog that in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "I have a Bone to Pick!" Funny Bone once lived on Punch Line Island which was later invaded by Count Moneybone's forces. After saving the Chuckling Trees from Count Moneybone's forces, Funny Bone becomes a member of the Skylanders.
Ghost Roaster (voiced by John Kassir in 2012) – An undead-elemental ghost-eating Ghoul. His catchphrase is "No Chain, No Gain!" Olav was once a chef in a mountain village until he fell into the Valley of the Undead and became a ghost-eating Ghoul. He started eating the local ghosts until the ghost town's ethereal ruler was a little irritated and chained Ghost Roaster to a rattling spiked ball to warn any wandering spirits. Taking pity on Ghost Roaster, Master Eon made Ghost Roaster a Skylander in exchange that he eats only the bad ghosts.
Grim Creeper (voiced by Lex Lang) – An undead-elemental ghostly Reaper that debut in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Your Time is Up!" As a young boy, Grim Creeper was a student at the Grim Acres School for Ghost Wrangling. He was originally turned away by its headmaster until he helped to stop a herd of rampaging ghosts and contain them until helped arrive. Grim Creeper later became a member of the Skylanders.
Lightcore Grim Creeper – A lightcore version of him.
Legendary Grim Creeper – A dark blue and gold version of Lightcore Grim Creeper that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Hex (voiced by Courtenay Taylor) – An undead-elemental female Dark Elf sorceress. Her catchphrase is "Fear the Dark!" Hex was once targeted by the minions of Malefor until she managed to take a stand against him which resulted in her becoming undead upon entering the Undead lands. After the fierce fight against Malefor, Hex became a member of the Skylanders.
Lightcore Hex – A lightcore version of her.

Roller Brawl (voiced by Cree Summer) – An undead-elemental female Vampire roller jammer that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. Her catchphrase is "Let's Roll!" Roller Brawl had five older brothers that are members of her roller derby team until they were captured by Kaos' Drow Army. As a result of this, Roller Brawl joined up with the Skylanders in order to rescue her brothers and defeat Kaos.
Bone Bash Roller Brawl - Her SuperCharger form. In this form, her signature vehicle is the Tomb Buggy.


==== Water SkylandersEdit ====
Skylanders of the Water element uses water to wash away their enemies and can swim in water (which was only in the first two games).
Chill (voiced by Julie Nathanson in a Russian accent) – A water-elemental humanoid character that looks like a knight and makes her debut in Skylanders: Giants. Her catchphrase is "Stay Cool!" Chill was a guardian of the Snow Queen until a Cyclops Army abducted the Snow Queen during Chill's watch. As a member of the Skylanders, Chill vows to find the Snow Queen and rescue her.
Lightcore Chill – A lightcore version of her.
Legendary Chill – A dark blue and gold version of Lightcore Chill that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.
Blizzard Chill – Her Series 2 name.

Echo (voiced by Kimberly Brooks) – A water-elemental Water Dragon that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. She has powerful echolocation and sail fins all over her body. Her catchphrase is "Let's Make Some Noise!" Echo lived in an undersea kingdom that is built around an enormous oyster shell. When a gang of seahorses called the Aqua Jocks rode into the kingdom to steal the Pearl of Wisdom, Echo fought hard against the Aqua Jocks and defeated them. Her actions were discovered by Gill Grunt and Echo became a member of the Skylanders.
Flip Wreck (voiced by Jess Harnell) – A water-elemental armored Dolphin that wields a wooden sword and a steering wheel shield that debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Making Waves!" As an inhabitant of Bottlenose Bay, Flip Wreck was the more adventurous of its dolphin inhabitants. He later defended his fellow dolphins from a group of Ice Vikings. Using his makeshift armor, a wooden sword, and a steering wheel shield, Flip Wreck fended off the Ice Vikings. It was this heroic actions that made Flip Wreck a member of the Skylanders.
Gill Grunt (voiced by Darin de Paul in 2012) – A water-elemental, harpoon gun-wielding Gill-man. His catchphrase is "Fear the Fish!" Gill Grunt grew up in the Gillman City at the bottom of the ocean and was a member of the Gillman Marines. Upon being aroused by a Mermaid who was captured by Pirates, Gill Grunt joined up with the Skylanders so that he can save her. Gill Grunt was the one who discovered Echo and Punk Shock.He is spyros best friend
Anchors Away Gill Grunt – His Series 3 name.
Tidal Wave Gill Grunt – His Series 4 name.
Deep Dive Gill Grunt - His SuperCharger form. In this form, his signature vehicle is the Reef Ripper.

Punk Shock (voiced by Tara Platt) – A water-elemental crossbow-wielding electric eel that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. Her catchphrase is "Amp It Up!" She is a princess from the most royal family in Wondrous Waters. Her kingdom was once invaded by an army of Snow Trolls who wanted to steal the treasures of the Wondrous Waters. Upon defeating the Snow Trolls and melting the ice on her kingdom, Punk Shock was discovered by Gill Grunt and recruited into the Skylanders.
Rip Tide (voiced by Patrick Seitz) – A water-elemental frog-like Aqua Fighter that debuts in Skylanders: Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Go Fish!" Rip Tide was known as the best Aqua Fighter throughout Skylands where he was an expert at Swordfish Fencing, Hammerhead Heaving, and even the Blubber Whale Wallop. When Kaos' army of Squidface Brutes plotted to keep Rip Tide from being recruited by Master Eon to join the Skylanders. Rip Tide eventually became a member of Skylanders.
Slam Bam – (voiced by Fred Tatasciore in 2012) A water-elemental four-armed Yeti. His catchphrase is "Armed and Dangerous!" Slam Bam used to live a solitary life on top of a glacier. Slam Bam's hobbies included snowy slope surfing, studying ice sculptures, and eating snow cones. Upon drifting on a small iceberg after his glacier was destroyed by Kaos, he landed on Master Eon's island where he became a member of the Skylanders.
Legendary Slam Bam – A dark blue and gold version of Series 2 Slam Bam that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Wham-Shell (voiced by Chris Parson in 2012) – A water-elemental crustacean-like creature that wields a mace. His catchphrase is "Brace for the Mace!" Wham-Shell is the son of King Roland who used the mace of the Giant Clam Kings to fight off an army of invading Trolls. After Wham-Shell's victory over the Troll Army, he was approached by Master Eon and he joined up with the Skylanders.
Lightcore Wham-Shell – A lightcore version of him.

Zap (voiced by Jeff Bergman in 2012) – A water-elemental Water Dragon. His series 1 and 2 catchphrase is "Ride the Lightning!" Zap was separated from his parents and raised by Electric Eels. He built a golden harness which allowed him to carry an endless electric charge. Later on, Master Eon recruited him into the Skylanders.


=== GiantsEdit ===
The original Skylanders were Giants who first defeated the Arkeyans thousands of years before the events in the games. Giants have the ability to lift, throw, and destroy trees, towers, rocks, and other things that normal Skylanders can't destroy. In the final battle against the Arkeyans, the Giants sacrificed themselves and were shot to Earth where they have been buried underground ever since. The Giants were considered a myth until the events of Skylanders: Giants, when the Skylanders unearth them upon Kaos' return. Among the Giant Skylanders are:
Tree Rex (voiced by: Kevin Michael Richardson) – A life-elemental Giant Ent who is the leader of the Giants. Included in the Skylanders: Giants starter pack. His catchphrase is "Be Afraid of the Bark!" Tree Rex was once a towering tree until the magic leaked from the Arkeyans' factory had poisoned the soil and mutated the tree into Tree Rex. Tree Rex then destroyed the factory and plans to keep the natural order of things which resulted in the Giants coming together to fight the Arkeyans.
Gnarly Tree Rex – A blue and dark green version of Tree Rex that was included in special starter packs bundled with game consoles, and also sold separately.

Bouncer (voiced by Bumper Robinson) – A tech-elemental Giant Robot with a wheel-ended bottom in place of his legs. His catchphrase is "Deal with the Wheel!" Bouncer was originally an All-Star Roboto Ball player until his hometown was destroyed by the Arkeyans who outlawed Roboto Ball. As a converted security robot, Bouncer met his Mabu fans in the mines where he used his Roboto Ball skills to free the slaves and join up with the other Giants in their fight against the Arkeyan King.
Legendary Bouncer – A dark blue and gold version of Bouncer that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Crusher (voiced by Kevin Sorbo) – An earth-elemental Rock Giant with green crystal-like features that wields a hammer that is also called Crusher. His catchphrase is "It's Crush Hour!" As his father was a miner, Crusher traveled across Skylands to find rocks that he can crush with his hammer. When the Arkeyan King was stealing all the rocks, Crusher found fun in smashing Arkeyans and joined up with the Giants to fight the Arkeyans.
Granite Crusher – A black and blue-crystallized version of Crusher.

Eye-Brawl (voiced by Travis Willingham) – An undead-elemental Headless Giant and Flying Eye duo. His catchphrase is "I've Got my Eye on You!" Eye-Brawl started out as a Headless Giant and a Flying Eye that had a staring contest which lasted for 100 years. As neither of them emerged the victor, they joined forces to become a fighting force where the Flying Eye placed himself into the space where the Headless Giant's head should be. As a result of combining their abilities, Eye-Brawl became one of the most powerful Skylanders in all of Skylands and they joined up with the Giants in their fight against the Arkeyans. Eye-Brawl's eye half is mentioned to be the "Twin Brother" of Dive-Clops.
Pumpkin Eye-Brawl – A Halloween version of Eye-Brawl.

Hot Head (voiced by Patrick Seitz) – A fire-elemental Giant Lava Golem. His catchphrase is "I'm on Fire!" Hot Head once leapt into a pool of magical oil which was the very first pool of magical oil eveer to be discovered in Skylands. The effect of the pool exploding evaporated the pool while fusing the magical oil with Hot Head granting him an endless supply. Hot Head joined up with the Giants in their fight against the Arkeyans.
Ninjini (voiced by Laura Bailey) – A magic-elemental Giant Elven Ninja Genie. Her catchphrase is "Any Last Wishes?" She was once an ordinary Giant Elven Ninja until a jealous evil sorceress trapped her in an enchanted bottle. As she became powerful during her imprisonment, she managed to squeeze out of her enchanted bottle where she joined the Giants in their fight against the Arkeyans.
Scarlet Ninjini – A red and green version of Ninjini.

Swarm – An air-elemental Giant Insectoid Bee with two stinger-like spikes on his wrists. His catchphrase is "Bring the Sting!" He was one of the 9,000 members of an insect royal family until the day he grew larger than the others and was unable to fit in his hive. When Swarm was discovered by the Giants during his journey, he joined them where he uses his brute strength to help them fight the Arkeyans.
Thumpback (voiced by Dan Neil) – A water-elemental Blue whale creature that wields an anchor on a chain. His catchphrase is "Hail to the Whale!" Thumpback was once a member of a pirate crew that rode on the ship called the Phantom Tide where Thumpback killed time by fishing. Upon snagging the Leviathan Cloud Crab, Thumpback was pulled far from his ship. Upon being separated from the Pirates after the Leviathan Cloud Crab got away, Thumpback joined up with the Giants in their fight against the Arkeyans.


=== Swap ForceEdit ===
The Swap Force are Skylanders who have the ability to mix up their powers and skills ever since they were caught in an eruption of a mystical volcano in the Cloudbreak Islands. They debuted in Skylanders: Swap Force. Among these Skylanders are:
Wash Buckler (voiced by John DiMaggio) – A water-elemental Mermasquid pirate and one of the two co-leaders of the Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Eight Legs and No Pegs!" he also has a color shift version of him exclusive to Gamestop and Toy "R" Us. As an orphant Wash Buckler grew up on one of the roughest pirate ships in Skylands. He led his pirate crew into non-pirating activities where he even defended them against the other pirates. Wash Buckler's heroic actions against the enemy pirates caught the eye of Master Eon who recruited him into the Skylanders.
Dark Wash Buckler – His dark version.

Blast Zone (voiced by Jess Harnell) – A fire-elemental Furnace Knight with heat-seeking bomb and one of the two co-leaders of the Swap Force. His catchphrase is "Blast and Furious!" Blast Zone was originally part of the Skylands Blast Zone where they disarmed every bombs. The Trolls were getting tired of Blast Zone's actions and they targeted him by placing 100 bombs in his village. Blast Zone devoured each one and repelled the Trolls. Blast Zone's heroic actions against the Trolls was enough for Master Eon to recruit him into the Skylanders. Blast Zone was the one who discovered Freeze Blade.
Dark Blast Zone – His dark version.

Boom Jet (voiced by Roger Craig Smith) – An air-elemental Sky Surfer with an airplane engine. His catchphrase is "Bombs Away!" Growing up in Billowy Cloudplains, Boom Jet was an expert aerial daredevil who is always seen on his airplane engine day and night. When the Darkness threatened Billowy Cloudplains, Boom Jet sprung into action and saved all of its inhabitants while Billwoy Cloudplains was destroyed. With his fellow citizens safe, Boom Jet found Master Eon and joined up with the Skylanders.
Doom Stone (voiced by Travis Willingham) – An earth-elemental living Gladiator Statue. His catchphrase is "Another Smash Hit!" Doom Stone was carved from the hardest and purest stone by a lazy wizard who needed help around his castle. Doom Stone was loyal to the wizard until the day when the evil twin of the wizard captured the wizard in order to steal the spells for himself. After Doom Stone defeated the wizard's evil twin, the wizard hooked Doom Stone up with Master Eon who inducted him into the Skylanders.
Fire Kraken (voiced by Billy West) – A fire-elemental Chinese dragon Warrior. His catchphrase is "Burn to be Wild!" Growing up on a small island on a vast fire ocean, Fire Kraken was the swiftest and more agile of his tribe. He leapt into action when his island was attacked by a fleet of Fire Trolls and used his staff to set the ships ablaze forcing them to retreat. Fire Kraken later joined up with the Skylanders.
Jade Fire Kraken – A green version of Fire Kraken.

Free Ranger (voiced by Joey Camen) – An Air-Elemental Storm Chicken. His catchphrase is "Whip Up a Storm!" When he was being hatched, a lightningbolt struck Free Ranger's egg which led to him becoming a storm chaser. When he came across an evil storm, Free Ranger was stopped from leaping into it by Master Eon who told him that the evil storm is caused by the Darkness. This led to Free Ranger joining the Skylanders.
Legendary Free Ranger – A dark blue and gold version of Free Ranger that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Freeze Blade (voiced by Billy West) – A water-elemental Wildcat with ice skates. His catchphrase is "Keeping It Cool!" As a young boy, Freeze Blade's family moved from the Frozen Wastelands of Vesh to the Great Lava Lakes which was a problem for Freeze Blade since there is no ice to skate on. Later on in his life, Freeze Blade discovered the ability to skate onto any surface including bubbling lava. After saving Blast Zone from some Spell Punks, Blast Zone introduced Freeze Blade to Master Eon who invited him to join the Skylanders.
Nitro Freeze Blade – A gold and white version of Freeze Blade that is a Target exclusive.

Grilla Drilla (voiced by Chris Fries) – A life-elemental Drilla (a gorilla creature with drill-point armor that can cover his legs). His catchphrase is "If There's a Drill, There's a Way!" Grilla Drilla originally served the Drilla King in the subterranean Drilla Empire. When a Troll Mining Expedition snatched the Drilla King in order to get the information on the location of the Drilla Diamond, Grilla Drilla defeated the Trolls and saved the Drilla King. Instead of becoming the next Drilla King, Grilla Drilla instead joined up with the Skylanders.
Hoot Loop (voiced by Robin Atkin Downes) – A magic-elemental humanoid Owl Wizard. His catchphrase is "Let's Ruffle Some Feathers!" Raised by a guild of traveling magicians in Skyland's most famous circus, Hoot Loop used his abilities of illusions, spells, and teleportation to impress the audience. When an army of Greebles disguised as clowns invaded the circus as part of a plot to destroy it, Hoot Loop sprung into action and fought them up. One of the spectators of the fight was Master Eon who invited him to become a member of the Skylanders.
Enchanted Hoot Loop – A black and white version of Hoot Loop whose feathers turn blue in direct sunlight.

Magna Charge (voiced by Gregg Berger) – A tech-elemental Ultron Robot with magnetic abilities who can shoot energy orbs. His catchphrase is "Attract to Attack!" As Magna Charge was created with a Magnet Head, this problem caused him to keep pulling his peer near him. Upon being exiled to a faraway island, Magna Charge learned to control his magnetic abilities. Upon returning to find his home destroyed, Magna Charge went looking for answers and eventually met Master Eon who saw him as a perfect candidate for the Skylanders.
Nitro Magna Charge – A gold and white version of Magna Charge that is a Target exclusive.

Night Shift (voiced by Maurice LaMarche) – An undead-elemental Vampire Boxer. His catchphrase is "Roll with the Punches!" On top of the gloomy Batcrypt Mountains, Night Shift is a baron and heir to a great fortune until the day he decided to leave all that behind and become a boxer. When a rule change that states that teleportation was illegal, Night Shift can no longer do boxing until the day he met Master Eon who allowed him to use his skills as a Skylander.
Legendary Night Shift – A dark blue and gold version of Night Shift that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Rattle Shake (voiced by Troy Baker) – An undead-elemental Rattlesnake Cowboy with a snake launcher. His catchphrase is "Go Ahead, Snake My Day!" Rattle Shake's legend started on the day he was attacked by the Black Hat Gang (a gang of evil cows) who plotted to invade the nearby village unless Rattle Shake led them inside the magical volcano Mt. Cloudbreak. Rattle Shake was able to defeat the Black Hat Gang by summoning every snake in the area. It was his act of heroism that led to Master Eon enlisting him into the Skylanders.
QuickDraw Rattle Shake A white and blue glow-in-the-dark version of Rattle Shake exclusive from Frito-Lays mail-in promo.

Rubble Rouser (voiced by Jake Eberle) – An earth-elemental armored Rock Monster with drill boots. His catchphrase is "Brace for Impact!" Rubble Rouser spent his day digging through the vast underground of Deep Mountain. When the evil Rock Lords threatened his kind, Rubble Rouser defeated them. Upon being advised by his leaders, Rubble Rouser joined up with the Skylanders.
Spy Rise (voiced by J.B. Blanc) – A tech-elemental Android Spy with spider-like legs. His catchphrase is "It's Classified!" Spy Rise worked in his father's family business as a private investigator until the day his father vanished. Upon being tipped off by Master Eon, he stopped a plot to disrupt the ceremonial eruption of Mt. Cloudbreak and saved his father. With his father safe, Spy Rise joined up with the Skylanders.
Stink Bomb (voiced by Tom Kenny) – A life-elemental green Ninja Skunk. His catchphrase is "Clear the Air!" Stink Bomb was trained by the greatest ninja masters in the history of Skylands. Using his fighting skills and smell, Stink Bomb developed his own fighting skill called Kung Fume where he taught it to anyone that wants to learn it. News of Stink Bomb's exploits reached Master Eon who brought the young ninja into the Skylanders.
Trap Shadow (voiced by Marc Worden) – A magic-elemental purple feline whose appearance has the long fangs of a smilodon, the facial features of a black panther, and the fur-colored patterns of a tiger. His catchphrase is "Hide and Sleek!" As a member of an elite tribe of hunters in Skylands, Trap Shadow used his cat-like cunning, ingenious traps, and mystical stealth that enabled him to catch nearly everything that can be caught. When an evil cadre of wizards wanted Trap Shadow to capture Master Eon, he defeated the evil wizards and Master Eon enlisted him into the Skylanders.
Bronze & Silver Trap Shadow - A metallic bronze and silver version of Trap Shadow.


=== Trap MastersEdit ===
The Trap Masters (also called the Trap Team) are Skylanders who use Traptanium, a magic material that can harness the power of the Elements. The Trap Masters are charged with the duty of tracking down and apprehending the most notorious villains in Skylands. They serve as the guards of Cloudcracker Prison in order to prevent them from escaping. With their Traptanium weapons, the Trap Masters set out to recapture the notorious villains in Skylands after they were sprung from Cloudcracker Prison by Kaos in order to strengthen his army by the events of Skylanders: Trap Team. Among the Trap Masters are:
Snap Shot (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) – A water-elemental Crocagator (a crocodile/alligator hybrid) with a blue Traptanium bow and arrow who is the leader of the Trap Team. His catchphrase is "Croc and Roll!" Snap Shot came from a tribe of Crocogators that hunted Chompies for sport. He later left his tribe where he perfected his archery with Elves and his hunting skills with the Wolves. Become the most revered hunter in Skylands, Snap Shot attracted the attention of Master Eon who made Snap Shot a member of the Trap Team.
Dark Snap Shot – His dark version.

Blastermind (voiced by Wally Wingert) – A magic-elemental unspecified humanoid who wields a Traptanium psionic helmet with purple crystal stalks. His catchphrase is "Mind Over Matter!" Blastermind started out as the "Hide and Sheep" champion of the Sardonic Mountains. Upon falling into a cavern of shimmering Psionic Power Crystals, he gained psionic powers from them and used them to save his friends from the Ham Dragon. Afterwards, Blastermind joined the Trap Team
Bushwhack (voiced by Roger Craig Smith) – A life-elemental Tree Elf who wields a giant green Traptanium axe. His catchphrase is "Axe to the Max!" Born to a race of Tree Elves that protected the Arcadian Timberland, Bushwack was the smallest of his kind and had studied with Arbo. Bushwack received a magic axe from Arbo which he used to fight the Lumberjack Trolls that were attacking the Arcadian Timberland. After defeating the Lumberjack Trolls and destroying their machines, Bushwack became a member of the Trap Team.
Legendary Bushwhack - A dark blue and gold version of Bushwhack that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Enigma (voiced by Steven Blum) – A magic-elemental unspecified humanoid who wields a giant purple Traptanium staff. His catchphrase is "Out of Sight!" Enigma was summoned from a place "between the worlds" by a Mabu Mystic. When the Darkness plans to invade Enigma's world, Enigma chose to use his Sigil of Mystery to close the portal to his world forever. His actions attracting the attention of the Trap Team who welcomed Enigma to their group.
Invisibility Cloak Enigma – A clear variant of Enigma.

Gearshift (voiced by Susan Eisenberg) – A tech-elemental Android who wields a large yellow Traptanium gear. Her catchphrase is "All Geared Up!" Gearshift was created on the Tech Island of Metallana by King Mercurius who even considered Gearshift to be his daughter. Gearshift tended to the subterranean machines on Metallana. When a squadron of Undead Stormriders attacked Metallana, Gearshift used her knowledge of the labyrinth to hide her father as she uses the Great Gear to fight off the Undead Stormriders with the help of some of the workers. After saving her kingdom, Gearshift was inducted into the Trap Team.
Gusto – An unspecified air-elemental creature who wields a giant azure Traptanium boomerang. His catchphrase is "Gusts and Glory!" In the peaceful Thunderclap Kingdom, Gusto worked as a cloud wrangler and learned how to master the wind under the guidance of the Cloud Dragon. When a fleet of Dragon Hunters plotted to capture the Cloud Dragon, Gusto used his boomerang to fight them off and save the Cloud Dragon. Upon receiving his Traptanium boomerang, Gusto became a member of the Trap Team.
Head Rush (voiced by Audrey Wasilewski) – An earth-elemental unspecified humanoid that wears a helmet with a pair of large brown Traptanium horns. Her catchphrase is "Taking Charge!" Growing up in a small village that was oppressed by the Harvest Sphinx, Head Rush was the only one to stand up to the Harvest Sphinx. Upon breaking her fellow villagers from their spell, Head Rush led them into driving the Harvest Sphinx from their island. It was her act of bravery that gave Head Rush a spot on the Trap Team.
Nitro Head Rush - A gold and white version of Head Rush that is a Target exclusive.

Jawbreaker (voiced by Ike Amadi) – A tech-elemental robot with giant yellow Traptanium fists. His catchphrase is "Down for the Count!" Jawbreaker worked with his fellow robots in a subterranean complex that that powers the Sky Train that traveled to thousands of different islands daily. When an army of Gear Trolls invade the complex, Jawbreaker spring into action and used his massive fists to fight off the Gear Trolls. His quick action and the ability to think for himself made him a member of the Trap Team.
Legendary Jawbreaker – A dark blue and gold version of Jawbreaker that is a Toys "R" Us exclusive.

Ka-Boom (voiced by Dave Burchell) – A fire-elemental red humanoid with large red Traptanium cannon that blasts Traptanium cannonballs. His catchphrase is "Boom Time!" On the ancient volcanic island of Munitions Forge, Ka-Boom and his kind created the machinery that was sold to all of Skylands. Ka-Boom created the Boom Cannon when the evil Captain Ironbeard wanted the forge for himself in order to build his pirate armada. Ka-Boom used his Boom Cannon to sink every pirate ship until Captain Ironbeard retreated. His heroic actions led to Ka-Boom joining the Trap Team.
Knight Light (voiced by Josh Keaton) – A light-elemental unspecified humanoid wielding a translucent white Traptanium scimitar. His catchphrase is "See the Light!" Knight Light was the protector of the Starlight (the source of light, wisdom and vast energy in Radiant City). He protected the Starlight from the evil Luminous. Upon defeating Luminous, Knight Light became a member of the Skylanders.
Knight Mare (voiced by Courtenay Taylor) – A dark-elemental female Dark Centaur wielding a translucent black Traptanium flamberge. Her catchphrase is "Nowhere to Hide!" She was the protector of the Oracle of Stones (an enchanted game of Skystones that can predict the future). When a gang of Bicyclopes stole the Oracle of Stones and were about the ask the 7th wrong question, Knight Mare charged towards of the Bicyclopes and saved the Skylands from a terrible curse. Knight Mare then joined up with the Trap Team.
Krypt King (voiced by David Sobolov) – A muscular undead-elemental Arkeyan Spirit Knight who wields a dark gray Traptanium sword. His catchphrase is "I've got the Edge!" Originally a disembodied spirit that wandered throughout Skylands, Krypt King found himself at an ancient Arkeyan Vault where he managed to enter an enormous suit of armor and fought his way out of the Arkeyan Vault. Krypt King then became a member of the Trap Team. Before Krypt King appeared in Skylanders: Trap Team, his design was originally planned for an undead elemental Giant character for Skylanders: Giants until that character was scrapped.
Nitro Krypt King - A gold and white version of Krypt King that is a Target exclusive.

Lob-Star (voiced by Kevin Schon) – A water-elemental Ninja Lobster-like creature who wields two giant blue Traptanium shurikens. His catchphrase is "Star Bright, Star Fight!" Lob-Star started out as the head chef of his own restaurant in the underwater city of Star City where he often cooked for King Fish. When a giant Leviathan threatened to swallow up Lob-Star's guest as well as a plot to capture King Fish, Lob-Star sprung into action and used his secret fighting skills to repel the Leviathan from Star City. Lob-Star was later recruited by Master Eon to join the Trap Team.
Winterfest Lob-Star - A Christmas version of him.

Short Cut (voiced by John Kassir) – An undead-elemental creature with a pair of large dark gray Traptanium shears. His catchphrase is "Cut to the Chase!" Short Cut was renowned for making the finest clothing in all of Skylands. With his magic shears, no thread was too thick, no cloth was too bunchy, and no pattern was too hard to follow. When a ship carrying Skeleton Pirates appeared and demanded that Short Cut makes a magic hat that can tell the future, Short Cut would not let his talents be used for evil purposes and uses his shears to cut the sails of the Skeleton Pirates' ships to keep them from escaping. His brave actions caught the attention of Master Eon who made Short Cut a member of the Trap Team.
Thunderbolt (voiced by Dave Fennoy) – An air-elemental unspecified creature with an azure Traptanium Storm Sword. His catchphrase is "A Storm is Coming!" Growing up on the legendary Mount Cloudpierce, Thunderbolt hoped to gain the honor to wield the Storm Sword (a weapon that can change the seasons of Skylands). Upon winning the contest, Thunderbolt sprung into action when a Frost Mage stole the Storm Sword. Upon defeating the Frost Mage and restoring balance to the weather, Thunderbolt became a member of the Trap Team.
Tuff Luck (voiced by Marcella Lenz-Pope) – A life-elemental feline who wields two giant green Traptanium warblades. Her catchphrase is "Deal with It!" Tuff Luck's tribe guarded the Fortuna Springs (a spring where all the good luck comes from) in the Random Canyons for years. When Kaos' minions plotted to steal the water from the Fortuna Springs, Tuff Luck sprung into action and defeated Kaos' minions. Tuff Luck later left her tribe and joined up with the Trap Team.
Wallop (voiced by John DiMaggio) – An unknown earth-elemental creature that wields two translucent brown Traptanium hammers and wears a beetle-like helmet. His catchphrase is "Hammer It Home!" On Mount Scorch, Wallop's people used the lava pits there to forge the most awesome weapons in all of Skylands. Wallop was one of the finest apprentices on Mount Scorch. When a fierce Fire Viper awoke from its deep sleep and attacked Wallop's people, Wallop used his two hammers to take down the Fire Viper and saved his village. Wallop eventually joined up with the Trap Team.
Wildfire (voiced by Keythe Farley) – A fire-elemental Golden Lion wielding a translucent red Traptanium shield. His catchphrase is "Bringing the Heat!" As a young lion of the Fire Claw Clan, Wildfire was about the enter the Rite of Infernos (a test of survival in the treacherous fire planes). As Wildfire was made out of gold, he was treated as an outcast and not allowed to participate. Carrying his father's enchanted shield, Wildfire followed the other Lions and came to their rescue when they were cornered by a giant Flame Scorpion. It was his father's magical shield that gave Wildfire the strength to defeat the Flame Scorpion and become the mightiest of the Fire Claw Clan. Wildfire eventually became a member of the Trap Team.
Dark Wildfire – His dark version.


=== SuperChargersEdit ===
The SuperChargers are Skylanders that are trained to pilot the most powerful vehicles in Skylands as seen in Skylanders: SuperChargers. When a SuperCharger Skylander hops into his or her signature vehicle, they become SuperCharged earning a damage boost and other perks. Their vehicles are powered by the Legendary Rift Engines. Besides the SuperCharger forms of Eruptor, Pop-Fizz, Gill Grunt, Jet Vac, Roller Brawl, Stealth Elf, Terrafin, and Trigger Happy, among the SuperChargers are:
Spitfire (voiced by Diedrich Bader) - A fire-elemental Flame Spirit who is the leader of the SuperChargers. His signature vehicle is the Hot Streak and is catchphrase is "Fuel the Fire!". Spitfire was the fastest driver on the Super Skylands Racing Circuit. When Kaos unleashed his Sky-Eating Machine, Spitfire was approached by Master Eon to lead the SuperChargers.
Astroblast (voiced by Neal McDonough) - A light-elemental creature whose signature vehicle is the Sun Runner. His official catchphrase is "Ready, Set, Glow!". While on a secret mission in troll territory, Astroblast crash landed on a remote island where he found the legendary Rift Engine. Shortly after the discovery, an army of trolls appeared on a nearby canyon ridge and quickly charged toward Astroblast. After an epic shootout with Astroblast, the trolls fled in defeat. Master Eon thanked him for saving the Rift Engine and beckoned him to return it to the Skylander Academy. Astroblast accepted the invitation and was made a Skylander shortly thereafter.
Dive-Clops (voiced by Maurice LaMarche) - A water-elemental Eye in an atmospheric diving suit who is the "Twin Brother" of Eye-Brawl. His signature vehicle is the Dive Bomber, and his catchphrase is "Look Out Below!". Dive-Clops lost his bat wings after they were shot off by pirates. Upon sinking to the bottom of the Swirling Sea, he was saved by a race of Jelly Dwarves who built him a magnificent dive suit for him to explore the ocean in. After getting sucked into the Whirlpool of Mystery, Dive-Clops found himself thousands of years later where he joined up with the Skylanders.
Fiesta (voiced by Carlos Alazraqui) - An undead-elemental creature. His signature vehicle is the Crypt Crusher and his catchphrase is "It's Party Time!" Despite being undead, Fiesta is the life of the party where used to be the head of a popular mariachi band that entertained the personal court of Count Moneybone. When the Skylanders arrived to fight Count Moneybone, Fiesta realized that Count Moneybone is not kind and generous as he claimed as he leads his bandmates into distracting Count Moneybone's robot army. Even though the Skylanders were unaware of Fiesta's involvement in Count Moneybone's defeat, this act of bravery and defiance did catch the attention of Master Eon who recruited him at once.
Hammer Slam Bowser (voiced by Kenny James) - A fire-elemental Koopa who is the main villain of the Mario franchise. His signature vehicle is Clown Cruiser, an air-elemental vehicle. Bowser and Donkey Kong were brought to Skylands by the Skylanders to help them defeat Kaos after answering their distress call that reached across dimensions
Dark Hammer Slam Bowser - His dark version.

High Volt (voiced by Josh Duhamel) - A tech-elemental unspecified armored creature. His signature vehicle is the Shield Striker and his official catchphrase is "Protect and Surge!" High Volt was once a commander of a special security force that was in charge of patrolling the border of Skylands and the mysterious uncharted region known as the Outlands. On a recent patrol mission into the Outlands, High Volt discovered a heavily guarded construction site, where Kaos' minions appeared to be building a colossal Doomstation of Ultimate Destruction! Realizing at once that all of Skylines was in danger, he raced to the Skylanders Academy to inform Master Eon and joined the Skylanders in their fight to stop it!
Nightfall - A dark-elemental Dreadwalker. Her catchphrase is "Dark and Dangerous!" Nightfall came from Fogshadow Tower, a mysterious fortress in the middle of the Poison Sea. While most Dreadwalkers stayed within the noxious cloud they called home, Nightfall preferred to dive into the black abyss and hunt the dark monsters that threatened her people. Her signature vehicle is the Sea Shadow which she originally built to explore the shadowy depths of the Poison Sea near her home. After fending off a Leviathan to buy the evacuating inhabitants of Fogwater Tower some time, she was discovered by Master Eon who recruited her to join the Skylanders.
Smash Hit (voiced by Rob Paulsen) - An earth-elemental warsupial. His signature vehicle is the Thump Truck and his official catchphrase is "Let's Rock!" The Warsupials are a rare species that are widely renowned for their skills in combat. During the peaceful times, Smash Hit's kind were responsible for locating and demolishing any artifacts from the Arkeyan Empire that were deemed too dangerous to leave standing. Smash Hit was so skilled with his wrecking ball weapon that he can single-handedly dismantle an Arkeyan Conquertron in an hour. Upon his skills being noticed by Master Eon, he was enlisted in a new wrecking crew that specializes in dealing with Kaos. The wrecking crew in question....the SuperChargers
Splat (voiced by Nika Futterman) - A magic-elemental faun whose signature vehicle is the Splatter Splasher. Her official catchphrase is "The Art of War!" Growing up in a typical faun village, Splat was much different from her classmates. While her classmates would recite the same poems, play the same music, and paint the same portrait of their ancestor Fluty Hoofdancer, Splat secretly learned the art of war by secretly going to the river after school to practice her fighting skills against the creatures that threaten her village. This enraged the village elders until the day when a band of Drows attacked the village to steal their valuable art. After standing her ground and fending off the Drows, Splat makes good impression everywhere upon joining the Skylanders.
Stormblade (voiced by Stephanie Lemelin) - An air-elemental Bird. Her catchphrase is "Feather the Storm!" Stormblade's signature vehicle is the Sky Slicer which she originally built to explore the furthest reaches of Skylands ever since finding out that Skylands has no bottom. Master Eon instantly saw the unquenchable thirst for exploration that resided in Stormblade, and asked her to join the Skylanders on a very special mission that would take her through the uncharted rifts between worlds!
Thrillipede (voiced by Patrick Seitz) - A life-elemental millipede whose signature vehicle is the Buzz Wing. His official catchphrase is "All Hands on Deck!" As a top member of the Millipede Military, Trillipede was known for shooting 300 Greeble airships out of the sky. Following the end of the Great Greeble War, Thrillipede returned to his home of Flutter Bay as a celebrated hero. News of his heroics reached Flynn who put himself against Thrillipede to see if the stories about him are true. Thrillipede was victorious in each of the challenges and was asked to join the Skylanders afterwards. Flynn later made a claim that he made Thrillipede win so that he wouldn't embarrass Thrillipede in front of his hometown.
Turbo Charge Donkey Kong (voiced by Takashi Nagasako) - A life-elemental gorilla who is the main protagonist of the Donkey Kong games. His signature vehicle is the Barrel Blaster, a tech-elemental vehicle. Donkey Kong got sent to Skylands by the Skylanders to help them defeat Kaos after answering their distress call.
Dark Turbo Charge Donkey Kong - His dark version.


=== Sidekicks/MinisEdit ===
The Sidekicks are miniature versions of existing Skylanders. According to descriptions, they are from a parallel world where everything is smaller. Back in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure, Giants, and Swap Force, they could only follow Skylanders around once placed on the Portal of Power. But as of Skylanders: Trap Team, they are now considered as Minis and can now be as playable as any Skylander figures. However, they share the same powers and abilities with their normal counterparts.
Barkley (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) – A miniature version of Tree Rex.
Gnarly Barkley - A blue version of him.

Bop (voiced by Keith Silverstein) – A miniature version of Bash.
Breeze (voiced by Salli Saffioti) – A miniature version of Whirlwind.
Drobit (voiced by Alex Ness) – A miniature version of Drobot.
Eye-Small (voiced by Travis Willingham) – A miniature version of Eye-Brawl.
Gill Runt (voiced by Darin de Paul) – A miniature version of Gill Grunt.
Hijinx (voiced by Courtenay Taylor) – A miniature version of Hex.
Mini Jini (voiced by Laura Bailey) – A miniature version of Ninjini.
Pet-Vac (voiced by Greg Ellis in the US version, Ally McCrae in the UK version) – A miniature version of Jet-Vac.
Power Punch Pet-Vac - A red version of him.

Small Fry (voiced by Robert Cait) – A miniature version of Fryno.
Spry (voiced by Josh Keaton) – A miniature version of Spyro.
Terrabite (voiced by Joey Camen) – A miniature version of Terrafin.
Thumpling (voiced by Dan Neil) – A miniature version of Thumpback.
Trigger Snappy (voiced by Dave Wittenberg) – A miniature version of Trigger Happy.
Weeruptor (voiced by Keythe Farley) – A miniature version of Eruptor.
Eggscellent Weeruptor - An Easter version of him.

Whisper Elf (voiced by Audrey Wasilewski) – A miniature version of Stealth Elf.


== AntagonistsEdit ==
Kaos (voiced by Richard Steven Horvitz) – A renegade Kaos-element Portal Master who is the primary antagonist of the console versions of the series. Kaos was once a prince, but after suffering insults about his bad smells and looks, he gave away his royal name and fled to the wilderness followed by his butler Glumshanks. He attempted to take over the Skylands, but was thwarted and banished to the Outlands. Besides Glumshanks, Kaos is served by an army of Cyclopes, Drows, Geargolems, Greebles, K-Bots, Spell Punks, and Trolls. In the first Skylanders game, he used a Hydra to destroy the Core of Light and Master Eon's body. At the end of the game, Kaos is defeated, captured, and sent to Earth by the Core of Light as punishment and lastly heard being annoyed by a dog. In Skylanders: Giants, he returns to Skylands with an Arkeyan Conquertron and a desire to conquer Skylands with many Arkeyans. Even though Kaos was defeated and the Iron Fist of Arkus was destroyed, Kaos was evacuated from the area by Glumshanks who piloted the last active Arkeyan robot. When Kaos and Glumshanks retreat back to Kaos' lair to come up with another plot, they are visited by Kaos' mother. He reappears in the console versions of Skylanders: Swap Force, once again as the main antagonist where he teams up with his Mother to use Cloudbreak Island's volcano to spread Darkness throughout Skylands. The Skylander's defeat Kaos where he ends up with Glumshanks' legs and is blasted of from the volcano. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Kaos frees the Doom Raiders from Cloudcracker Prison in order to get the Doom Raiders on his side. The Evil Frequency Modulator of Evil Doom he used to free the Doom Raiders has also destroyed Cloudcracker Prison. The Golden Queen allows Kaos and Glumshanks to stay while she and the Doom Raiders make their own plans for the Skylands. Upon being defeated in an "Evil-Off" challenge against Golden Queen, Kaos ends up turning to the Skylanders for help. After Golden Queen is defeated, Kaos and Glumshanks take over Golden Queen's weapon where Kaos takes in the powers of the rotten cheese that Dr. Krankcase had gathered and the Traptanium where he gains some powers. Kaos plans to take out the Portal Masters as he challenges them to a final battle. The Skylanders head to the Ultimate Weapon to confront Kaos. After defeating Smoke Scream, the Skylanders confront Kaos who uses his powers to grow to large size and later sprouts bird-like wings. The Skylanders defeat Kaos and placed him in a special Kaos Trap while the Ultimate Weapon explodes. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Kaos creates the Doomstation of Ultimate Doomstruction, which is a giant Kaos-like head that consumes the sky in order to disable the connections between the Portal Masters and their Skylanders. His additional signature vehicle is the Doom Jet.
Glumshanks (voiced by Chris Cox) – A Troll who is Kaos' butler. Glumshanks flunked everything back when he was in the Troll academy, from rudimentary detonation to advanced annihilation. He couldn't work out which end of the dynamite to light. He eventually ended up becoming the butler for the young prince Kaos. After Kaos abandoned his royal family, Glumshanks remained loyal to Kaos and headed out into the wilderness along with the tyrant. They eventually went across the universe in search of a portal for Kaos' research of his magic until they reached Skylands where Kaos would begin his plan to destroy the Core of Light in order to take over that world and the universe.

Troll Super Tank – The Troll Super Tank is a tank which is operated by Trolls that appears in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure.
Hydra – The Hydra (also known as the Hydragon) is a four-headed dragon that appears in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure. Each of its four heads represents the elements of Fire, Water, Life, and Undead. All four heads were different colors. Kaos summoned it in his final battle with the Skylanders. After Kaos was defeated, the Hydra disappeared back into the darkness.
Occulous – A giant eyeball monster who terrorizes the Darklight Crypt by banning pies for the ghost inhabitants there. They like pies and it stops them from consuming living matter.
Vathek (voiced by Steven Blum) – An Undead Dragon and the evil brother of Ramses who takes over Dragon's Peak.
Hektore (voiced by Dave Wittenberg) – An unspecified creature who is the primary antagonist of the 3DS version of the game.
The Darkness (voiced by Ike Amadi) - The Darkness is the ultimate evil in Skylands. It's first appearance was in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure, where it was shown as a cluster of black clouds. When the core of light was rebuilt, it disappeared. In Skylanders: Superchargers, it appeared as a "lava lamp" that could speak. It manipulated Kaos into trying to destroy Skylands by threatening to steal his powers. Later, Kaos realized he was being manipulated and banished The Darkness back to its realm. After the return to Skylanders academy, it suddenly emerged from a rift, using the remaining parts of the Sky Eater as armor. After the Skylanders defeated it, the force behind all evil was finally destroyed. but it is unknown if the darkness is truly destroyed or not.
Captain Dreadbeard – A seadog who is the leader of the Seadog Pirates and is the most villainous and scurviest of the pirates. He and his Seadog Pirates have taken over the Pirate Seas where they have been forcing its inhabitants to play cards games where they always cheat. In Skylanders: Giants, Captain Dreadbeard and his Seadog Pirates have taken over Cutthroat Carnival and claimed it as their hideout. After being defeated by the Skylanders, Captain Dreadbeard later stowed away on the Dread-Yacht and offered the Skylander rematches of their Skystones game at any time.
Arkeyan Conquertron (voiced by George Takei) – One of the Arkeyans that had enslaved the Mabus at the mines 10,000 years ago as seen in Skylanders: Giants. The Skylanders had to break the chains holding the platform it was standing on which caused the Arkeyan Conquertron to fall. He was later reactivated by Kaos and joined forces with him in his quest of taking over Skylands.
Arkeyan King – The Arkeyan King was the previous ruler of the Arkeyans who had ruled over Skylands 10,000 years ago as seen in Skylanders: Giants. He was defeated by the Giants, who afterwards removed the Iron Fist of Arkus from the king's grasp. Upon their king's defeat, the Arkeyan robots around Skylands were shut down.
Noodles (voiced by Alex Ness) – Noodles is an Ice Ogre that lives in Glacier Gully as seen in Skylanders: Giants. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Noodles appears in the "Nightmare Express" Adventure Pack as a rival treasure hunter who competes against the Skylanders to obtain the Trolly Grail.
Pipsqueak – Pipsqueak is a Cyclops Chopper monarch in a mohawk that is the leader of the forces that took over Molekin Mountain as seen in Skylanders: Giants. Pipsqueak is the nephew of some high-ups in the Cyclops government. He and his army invaded Molekin Mountain where he had heard about an oracle. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Pipsqueak is involved in the "Skaletones Showdown."
Chompy Mage (voiced by Alex Ness) – The Chompy Mage is a Half-Wizard Half-Chompy who can summon Chompies and can turn into a giant Chompy. The Chompy Mage has a Chompy puppet on his left hand which occasionally speaks. Believe it or not, the Chompy Mage actually hatched from inside a Chompy Pod. At least that is how his Chompy hand puppet tells the story. Having been raised by Chompies, it is no surprise that the Chompy Mage is a little strange. He simply grew up embracing the Chompy way – believing that Skylands would be a better place if everyone was a Chompy (an illegal enchantment which he has actually tried to perform on several occasions). In Skylanders: Giants, the Skylanders confronted him in Wilikin Village. In Skylanders: Trap Team, the Chompy Mage appears as a life-elemental capturable villain after his illegal actions have landed him in Cloudcracker Prison where he met the other Doom Raiders. He later escaped and is encountered on Chompy Mountain until he was defeated by the Skylanders. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, the Chompy Mage reappears as a raceable villain riding his signature vehicle, the Chompy Buster. After defeating him in Boss Pursuit, the player will be able to race as the Chompy Mage in Race Mode.
Drill-X (voiced by George Takei) – Drill-X is a large singing drilling robot that appeared in Skylanders: Giants. Kaos used Drill-X in order to drill his way to the Lost City of Arkus.
Brute – Brute is a Jawbreaker who appears in Skylanders: Giants. Brute is disambiguated from the other Jawbreakers due to the cap he is always wearing. Kaos claims to one day take Brute fishing once he has taken over the Skylands.
Captain Frightbeard (voiced by John Kassir) – Captain Frightbeard is a Giant Seadog who is the primary antagonist of the 3DS version of Skylanders: Giants. Over 10,000 years ago, Captain Frightbeard terrorized Skylands until the Arkeyans locked him and his pirate crew in the Chest of Exile with Captain Frightbeard's own sword acting as its lock. Having escaped from his imprisonment (many believe he struck a deal for his freedom with an evil sorcerer), Captain Frightbeard sought out to find the Chest of Exile to release his pirate fleet to resume his terror on Skylands. With the help of his lieutenants, he managed to reach the Chest and released his pirate fleet in a vicious malestrom, preparing to resume his terror upon Skylands. Captain Frightbeard was soon confronted and defeated by the Skylanders. Upon his defeat, Captain Frightbeard's sword flew out of his grip and pierced into the open Chest of Exile, causing the malestrom to suck him and his pirate fleet back within the chest, locking them in once again with Captain Frightbeard's sword serving as the lock. Captain Frightbeard later appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers as a villain in the Boss Pursuits. Defeating him in the sea race unlocks him for racing. His signature vehicle is The Lil' Phantom Tide.
Rustbeard – Rustbeard is a robot pirate who is one of Captain Frightbeard's lieutenants.
Squidbeard – Squidbeard is a large Squidface Brute who is one of Captain Frightbeard's lieutenants.

Kaos' Mom (voiced by Christine Baranski) – The unnamed mother of Kaos who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. She shares the role of main antagonist with Kaos where they plan to harness the powers of the mystical volcano in the Cloudbreak Islands. Around the end of the game, Kaos' Mom ends up trapped in a mirror that ends up in Flynn's possession.
Bubba Greebs – Bubba Greebs is a Mutant Greeble who is the pet of Kaos' Mom.

Baron von Shellshock – Baron von Shellshock is a crab-like baron who appeared in Skylanders: Swap Force. He works for Kaos where he takes over Motleyville until he was defeated by the Skylanders. In Skylanders: Swap Force, Baron von Shellshock appears where he runs the arena on Battlebrawl Island near Motleyville.
Mesmeralda (voiced by Grey DeLisle) – Mesmerelda is a spider-like puppeteer who appeared in Skylanders: Swap Force. She was enlisted by Kaos' Mom to stop the Skylanders atop the Frostfest Mountains and catch the Frosthound. Mesmeralda was defeated by the Skylanders. Mesmeralda later appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers as a villain in the Boss Pursuits. Defeating her in the sea race unlocks her for racing.
Sheep Mage (voiced by Cam Clarke) – The Sheep Mage is a magician who appears in the "Sheep Wreck Island" Adventure Pack in Skylanders: Swap Force. He can change into a giant sheep with small horns. The Sheep Mage has a sheep puppet on his right hand. Displeased that his sheep are being mistreated by the inhabitants of Skylands, the Sheep Mage rallied all the sheep to form an army in order to fight for their "sheepdom" in Skylands. His rebellion was stopped by the Skylanders and Blind Beard. He and the Chompy Mage are brothers.
Cluck (voiced by James Horan impersonating Alan Rickman) – Cluck is a small white bird in a large metallic suit who is the main antagonist of the "Tower of Time" Adventure Pack of Skylanders: Swap Force. His large metallic suit was built by the Time Trolls. Cluck was able to take over Clock Town, setting up roost in the Clocktower and stopping time from flowing properly. This threatened to trap Skylands in an infinite time loop. He was defeated by the Skylanders, destroying his suit, but the small bird promised that they haven't seen the last of him as he flew clumsily out of the Clocktower. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Cluck is shown to have the Kolossal Kernal in his possession which he used to grow his vast chicken empire in the form of "Cap'n Cluck's King Size Chicken" restaurant chain. He now plans to grow a chicken army with it as part of his plot to conquer Skylands. Upon confronting Cluck in his headquarters, the Skylanders face off against him in his flying machine. By sending bloated chickens into a machine that would launch them at Cluck, the Skylanders were able to defeat Cluck and claim the Kolossal Kernal as Cluck vows to have his revenge. Cluck can be unlocked for racing by beating him in a sky race.
Count Moneybone (voiced by Nolan North) – Count Moneybone is a skeleton who is the primary antagonist of the 3DS version of Skylanders: Swap Force. He is the lord of the Underworld and is flanked by an army of clockwork creatures. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Count Moneybone assists Kaos in his goals to use the Sky Eater on Skylands. He is shown to have Master Eon as his prisoner. With help from the Cloudbreather Dragon, the Skylanders were able to trace Master Eon to the Land of the Undead where Count Moneybone is holding Master Eon. Upon arrival in the Land of the Undead, the Skylanders find that Count Moneybone has Master Eon in a Traptanium Prison. Count Moneybone later fights the Skylanders in his vehicles to make sure that they don't free Master Eon from his Traptanium Prison. The Skylanders managed to defeat Count Moneybone and free Master Eon.
Evilon (voiced by Daniel Hagen) – Evilon is the Mirror Dimension version of Master Eon in the "Mirror of Mystery" Adventure Pack in Skylanders: Trap Team. He threatened to destroy the regular dimension of Skylands, but offered the Portal Master to confront him in the Mirror Dimension.
Dream Sheep (voiced by Dave B. Mitchell) – A sheep who is the primary antagonist of the 3DS version of Skylanders: Trap Team. He is the evil master of nightmares. Dream Sheep and Sleep Dragon were accidentally freed by Hugo from the Realm of Dreams after Hugo had read a cursed book in the Eternal Archives. Dream Sheep has concocted a sleep spell that threatens to put all of Skylands to sleep, allowing him and his army of nightmares to take over. However, the Skylanders are immune to the spell and are the only ones capable of stopping the Dream Sheep.
Sleep Dragon (voiced by Keythe Farley) – A dragon who is Dream Sheep's sidekick. He has a habit of falling fast asleep which annoys Dream Sheep,he is later revealed at the end of the game that he is the king of the realm of dreams and thanks the skylanders for defeating the dreams sheep and has a special surprise waiting for them in their dreams and later departs to the dream realm.

Nightmare Villains – The Nightmare Villains are a group of villains who appear in the 3DS version of Skylanders: Trap Team. They are the servants of Dream Sheep.
Baron Von Smashbeak – An armor-plated cuckoo.
Big Bertha Bubblethorn – A large Nightmare Chompy.
Birdo Chesterfield – A bird sorcerer.
Bobbin Hood – A Nightmare Elf archer.
Boris Blisterbottom – A Nightmare Chompy
Bucktooth the Tiny – A Pirate Henchman.
Grunkin Gobsprout – A Nightmare Troll.
Marf Gargaroots – A Troll Illusionist.
Olaf Crushersson – An Goliath Drow who is also a birdwatcher.
Runys Pointyboots – A Drow witch.
Russel Purplestache – A Nightmare walrus pirate that is similar to Brawl & Chain.
Shelshock Sheldon – An evil turtle creature that is similar to Bomb Shell.
Spike McPokerton – An Nightmare Bird Brain.

Malefor - The self-crowned Undead Dragon King of the Skylands underworld. No one knows where he came from, but he has resided in the depths of the underworld for centuries. Malefor was responsible for corrupting Cynder and hunting down Hex, forcing the latter to confront the evil dragon and defeat him in single combat. He soon made his official debut in the IDW Skylanders comic story issue, Return of the Dragon King. It is revealed that the battle between him and Hex left Malefor nearly destroyed and a shell of his former self. Malefor was able to patch himself together with steampunk armor he had constructed, all the while plotting revenge on those who caused him pain and frustration. He offered to help a distressed fairy named Calliope find her lost family in exchange for doing whatever Malefor wanted, which included stealing the powers of Spyro, Cynder and Hex in order for him to fully escape from the underworld. After being revived, Malefor sought to rule Skylands as its king and destroy the Skylanders Academy to build a fortress in its place as revenge for the troubles Spyro, Cynder and Hex had caused him in the past. The evil Dragon King, despite being strengthed by the powers of the Skylanders he stole, was once again defeated by the Skylanders with the help of a redeemed Calliope. Before his latest defeat, Malefor claimed to have battled Spyro, something the young dragon has no memory of. Malefor later made a few cameos in the game Skylanders: SuperChargers as a rare Skystone.
Lord Stratosfear (voiced by Marc Graue) - Lord Stratosfear is an evil storm giant in Skylanders: SuperChargers. When Kaos's forces came to the Cloud Kingdom and promised the Storm Giants"safety" should they join them, it was Stratosfear who willingly accepted the offer. The dark forces granted him the Thunderous Bolt and the promise of a villa that overlooked the kingdom. With the Thunderous Bolt in his possession, Stratosfear had complete watch over the kingdom until the Skylanders came to retrieve the Bolt from the evil tyrant. Lord Stratosfear can be unlocked for racing the Boss Pursuit races after being defeated in a sky race.
Brimstone and Boulders - Brimstone and Boulders are a tag team robot duo in Skylanders: SuperChargers. Brimstone is a fire-breathing robot with the ring name Fired-Up Frontman and Boulders is an electrical drum-themed robot with the ring name of Percussion Pounder. The Skylanders had to fight them on Battlebrawl Island in order to fight Spellslamzer.
Captain Bristlestache - Captain Bristlestache is a walrus pirate in Skylanders: SuperChargers. The Skylanders had to fight him on Battlebrawl Island in order to fight Spellslamzer.
Spellslamzer (voiced by John Kassir) - Spellslamzer is a large Spell Punk in Skylanders: SuperChargers]. He was the crowned champion of Battlebrawl Island and was sought out by the Skylanders for navigation around the Spell Punk Library. Upon being defeated, Spellslamzer tells them the information they need. Spellslamzer can be unlocked for racing by beating him in a sea race.
Cockadoodledoom - Cockadoodledoom (also known as Agent 173) is the name of a massive rooster in Skylanders: SuperChargers. He was Cluck's first successful super soldier in his upcoming conquest over Skylands using an army of chickens.
Pterashark - The Pterashark is a gargantuan, flying shark-dog-like Titan in Skylanders: SuperChargers. It resides in the Montrous Isles and is a pet to two other Titans Beachcomber and Thunder Tow. The Pterashark goes on the attack after the Skylanders prevent it from stealing some bird eggs. The Skylanders were able to defeat the Pterashark.
Beachcomber (voiced by Grey DeLisle) - Beachcomber is a Squid Titan from Skylanders: SuperChargers. She resides on the Monstrous Island. When the Skylanders in the Dive Bomber disrupt Beachcomber's relaxing in order to get the water out, she goes underwater with the Skylanders in pursuit. Upon returning to the surface, Beachcomber attacks the Skylanders only to be defeated by them.
Thunder Tow - Thunder Tow is a Lobster Titan from Skylanders: SuperChargers. He resides on Monstrous Island. The Skylanders had to fight Thunder Tow in order to claim the Eye of the Ancients needed to complete the Core of Light.
Dread Roller - Dread Roller is a Troll Tank in Skylanders: SuperChargers. It was the Skylanders' first opponent in the Ridepocalypse Derby. Pandergast describes Dread Roller as the reigning super-class champion.
Turbo Teeth - Terror Teeth is a flying vehicle in Skylanders: SuperChargers. It was the Skylanders' second opponent in the Ridepocalypse Derby. Pandergast describes Turbo Teeth as the might mid-sized champ who is the fiercest most ferocious flying predator in all of Skylands.
Wreck O' Saururs - Wreck O' Saurus is a dinosaur-themed vehicle in Skylanders: SuperChargers. It was the Skylanders' final opponent in the Ridepocalypse Derby. Pandergast describes it as a creature so terrifying that looking at it directly would could melt your brains as well as being the "towering titan of tussel and teeth."
Blubberbead - Blubberbead is a walrus pirate that appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers. He and his pirate crew attack Skylander Academy and capture Mags who they imprison on the Bandit Train. The Skylanders encounter Blubberbeard in the engine room of the Bandit Train and fight his crew. Once Blubberbeard is defeated, the Skylanders free Mags and escape the Bandit Train.


=== Capturable VillainsEdit ===
In Skylanders: Trap Team, these villains are the most wanted villains in Skylands and had been previously apprehended by the Trap Masters. Most of the villains here are members of the Doom Raiders, the most powerful villains in Skylands who caused havoc all over Skylands from their hideout in the Savage Badlands, until met their match when the Trap Masters found their hideout, defeated them, and remanded them to Cloudcracker Prison. Kaos sprung them from Cloudcracker using his Evil Frequency Modulator of Evil Doom in order to strengthen his army while the Golden Queen seeks to use the strongest villains to build her Doom Raiders group to cause havoc in Skylands. Using magical Traps, Portal Masters are able to recapture these villains and use them to fight for good. If the person doesn't have any of the traps or if the current trap is full, the villains are transferred to the Skylanders Academy's Villain Vault to await the swap out. At the start of the game, each of the villains can only be used for 30 seconds which will get longer as the game progresses. Trap Masters have longer time with a trappable villain and recharge the timer faster Only the trappable villains can open the Villain Stashes. Besides Kaos and Chompy Mage, among the capturable villains are:
Bad Juju (voiced by Kimberly Brooks in a Jamaican accent) – An air-elemental skeleton ghost with a scepter. She is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at the Lair of the Golden Queen. Bad Juju comments that she has noticed how Flynn has got a thing for Cali.
Blaster-Tron – A light-elemental robot with an energized shotgun and a booster pack. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter in the Future of Skylands.
Bomb Shell (voiced by Greg Ellis) – A magic-elemental turtle that throws bombs. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter on the Chef Zeppelin.
Bone Chompy – An undead-elemental skeletal Chompy. While Bone Chompies are members of Kaos' army, one Bone Chompy was an inmate at Cloudcracker Prison. This Bone Chompy was the first villain the Skylanders encounter in the Golden Desert.
Brawl & Chain (voiced by David Boat) – A water-elemental walrus pirate with chains for hands where the end of them has a ball with hooks on it. He is the third villain the Skylanders encounter at Rainfish Rivieria. Brawl & Chain commented that if he could get an upgrade from Persephone, he would ask her for some hands.
Outlaw Brawl & Chain – A water-elemental walrus pirate with golden hand hooks that is (currently) a Target exclusive.

Brawlrus (voiced by Alex Ness) – A tech-elemental walrus pirate that uses a cannon that shoots out Starfish. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at Rainfish Riviera.
Broccoli Guy (voiced by Alex Ness) – A life-elemental broccoli sorcerer who speaks in the third person and claims to have been framed. He is the second villain encountered on Chompy Mountain. Broccoli Guy later gives his positive comments about the Skylanders Academy.
Steamed Broccoli Guy – A life-elemental broccoli sorcerer that is purple in color and exclusively available in the 8-Trap Pack.

Bruiser Cruiser (voiced by Mitchell Whitfield) – A tech-elemental troll that rides in a boxing machine that mimics his movements from within the safety of his barrier. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter on Chompy Mountain.
Buzzer Beak – A small air-elemental Bird Copter that wears a propeller hat. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter on Know-It-All Island.
Chill Bill (voiced by Billy West) – A water-elemental Snow Troll that performs freezing attacks with a freeze ray and also works as the DJ at Troll Radio. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at the Phoenix Psanctuary.
Chomp Chest (voiced by Patrick Seitz) – An earth-elemental living treasure chest. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at Monster Marsh. Chomp Chest once asked if the cafeteria at the Skylanders Academy serves treasure.
Chompy – A life-elemental Chompy who appears in the "Mirror of Mystery" Adventure Pack. While Chompies are members of Kaos' army, one Chompy was an inmate at Cloudcracker Prison.
Cross Crow (voiced by Fred Tatasciore in a Russian accent) – A water-elemental crow that wields a crossbow. He is the only villain the Skylanders fight in Time Town.
Cuckoo Clocker (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) – A large life-elemental cuckoo. He is the third villain the Skylanders encounter at the Phoenix Psanctuary when he is summoned by Chef Pepper Jack.
Doom Raiders – The Doom Raiders are the most powerful villains in Skylands. They caused havoc all over Skylands from their hideout in the Savage Badlands. The Doom Raiders met their match when the Trap Masters found their hideout, defeated them, and remanded them to Cloudcracker Prison. Some years later, Kaos freed them from Cloudcracker Prison using his Evil Frequency Modulator of Evil Doom where it has also destroyed Cloudcracker Prison.
Golden Queen (voiced by CCH Pounder) – An earth-elemental golden unspecified creature who seeks to obtain the services of the most powerful villains in Skylands in order to form her Doom Raiders group to cause havoc in Skylands. She is made entirely of gold and rich beyond her wildest imagination. The aptly named Golden Queen would gladly trade her entire fortune for just a little more. But why trade when you can steal? The Golden Queen then began to do that. But no matter how much she took, it was never enough. Through evil sorcery, she even learned how to turn people and objects into solid gold which still wasn't enough. The idea that any amount of treasure in Skylands did not belong to her was infuriating, so she embarked on a quest to take every last cent of it. But she couldn't do it alone. It was then that she formed the Doom Raiders, the most notorious group of villains ever assembled. As the leader of the Doom Raiders, the Golden Queen promised riches, world domination, and even all-you-can-eat shrimp in order to recruit special criminals to serve her cause. Together, the Doom Raiders terrorized Skylands until Master Eon and the Trap Masters put a stop to them, locking up all of them inside Cloudcracker Prison. She and the other Doom Raiders are freed from Cloudcracker Prison by Kaos so that they would help him take over Skylands. Golden Queen didn't see eye to eye with Kaos' plan and planned to have a Traptanium device built so that she can turn all of Skylands into gold. After her Doom Raiders are defeated, she receives rotten cheese from the future in order to enact her plans. She sends a transmission to all of Skylands where she gives her demands like the surrender of the Skylanders, the freedom of the Doom Raiders, all gold in Skylands must be delivered to her for tribute, and she reserves the royal right to make an infinite number of rules. To prove a point to all of Skylands, Golden Queen demonstrates her weapon which places Time Town into a crystal ball. Flynn and the Skylanders had obtain special rockets to get to the Skyhighlands in order to obtain a special prism that would direct them to Golden Queen. Afterwards, the Skylanders track Golden Queen to her lair in the Golden Desert. Golden Queen turns Cali into gold causing the Skylanders to pursue her. When the Skylanders catch up to Golden Queen, she unleashes her soldiers and Grave Clobber on them. After the Skylanders defeat Grave Clobber, Golden Queen escapes and plans to use her weapon on the Skylander Academy. In order to shut down Golden Queen's weapon, the Skylanders head to her lair to confront Golden Queen. Upon confronting Golden Queen, the Skylanders fight Golden Queen who even grows to giant size upon immersing herself in gold. When Golden Queen gets trapped in between two pillars, the Skylanders take the opportunity to defeat her. Golden Queen once suggested to have Skylanders Academy decorated in gold. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Golden Queen is featured in the Boss Pursuit races and can be unlocked for racing by beating her in a sea race.
Chef Pepper Jack (voiced by Darin de Paul) – A fire-elemental red Cajun chili pepper chef. Chef Pepper Jack was once the most renowned celebrity chef in all of Skylands....until he discovered ancient recipes for evil delicacies. That's when he turned his thriving restaurant business into a formidable criminal empire. The scam was simple, he would fly his zeppelin fortress over a village and order the townsfolk to surrender all of their money. If they didn't, he would promptly serve up a main course of spicy pepper bombs that would blow everything to smithereens. The Golden Queen valued both his explosive and non-explosive culinary skills and recruited him into the Doom Raiders at once. When he's not serving time in Cloudcracker Prison, he's serving up atomic omelets of doom! When he was freed from Cloudcracker Prison, he invaded the Phoenix Psanctuary where he targeted the eggs of the Phoenix Chicken. With Kaos' help, Chef Pepper Jack got away with one of the Phoenix Chicken's eggs. The Skylanders pursue Chef Pepper Jack in his Chef Zeppelin. The Skylanders were able to defeat Chef Pepper Jack. Chef Pepper Jack once commented that he once trained at a culinary academy that was similar to Skylanders Academy until he burned it down. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Chef Pepper Jack is featured in the Boss Pursuit races and can be unlocked for racing by beating him in a sky race.
Dr. Krankcase (voiced by Quinton Flynn) – A tech-elemental green mad scientist with wooden spider-like legs. No one is really quite sure exactly what Dr. Krankcase is a doctor of....but his technical engineering achievements are legendary. The secret to his success lies in his modified concoction of glowing green goo which causes wooden objects to come to life and turn evil. His unique skill-set makes him a valuable asset to the Doom Raiders who have plenty of nefarious uses for evil wooden creatures called Evilikins. It is also commonly known that Dr. Krankcase served as an evil inspiration to Kaos once upon a time who had figured out how to make his own wooden creatures called the Wilikin come to life after reading about Dr. Krankcase's exploits in the Minion Monthly Catalog. Kaos also respected Dr. Krankcase's interest in world domination and doom engineering not to mention his well-documented love of pickles. Following the Secret Sewer of Supreme Stink being shut down, Dr. Krankcase reopens Kaos' Wilikin Workshop in order to manufacture the material needed for the Golden Queen's Traptanium device. The Skylanders were able to defeat Dr. Krankcase.
Dreamcatcher (voiced by Tara Platt) – An air-elemental disembodied head of an unspecified creature. Dreamcatcher originally escaped from Lucid Lockdown within the Realm of Dreams before escaping from the dream realm itself. Not only can she read your mind while you're sleeping, but she can bring your worst nightmares to life. Using her mischievous powers of dream-stealing, she has driven entire villages to the point of madness all for the sheer thrill of it. Her playfully evil nature is what got her noticed by the Golden Queen who needed a good psychic for her evil schemes....and also for relationship advice. Loving both cunning plans and gossip, Dreamcatcher was happy to oblige and promptly joined the Doom Raiders. Although due to her aforementioned mischievous nature, the Golden Queen has found the relationship advice questionable. She was seen menacing the sleeping Mabu at Monster Marsh until the Skylanders wake them up. She later attacks Telescope Towers to obtain information of the Traptanium's secrets from the dreams of the scientists there. The Skylanders were able to defeat Dreamcatcher. Dreamcatcher later comments how Skylanders Academy reminds her of being back in school.
Luminous (voiced by Liam O'Brien) – A light-elemental star-shaped being that only appears in the "Sunscraper Spire" Adventure Pack. Being from the element of Light, Luminous has always feared the dark. Even his own shadow used to frighten him. So Luminous became determined to find the source of light so intense that no amount of darkness could exist in its presence. This quest drove him glaringly mad and he set out to destroy all who opposed him. Finding the Radiant City's Starlight, Luminous sought to steal it for himself and attacked the city. Knight Light fought Luminous to protect his home realm and was locked in battle with Luminous. After a fight that lasted several days, Knight Light emerged victorious and Luminous was imprisoned within Sunscraper Spire to never again threaten Skylands. Years later, the modern-day Skylanders arrived with Mags at Sunscraper Spire to investigate its presence after the destruction of Cloudcracker Prison. Seeing this as a chance to finally escape his prison, Luminous took on the form of Mags and led the Skylanders around the towers, tricking the Skylanders into unlocking the seals that imprisoned him in the center part of Sunscraper Spire. All of the seals were soon unlocked and Luminous revealed his true identity to the Skylander once they reached inside Tricked You Tower. He engaged them in battle. Despite his renewed power over the Light element, Luminous was defeated. The Portal to a Light Trap opened up and Luminous accepted his fate and ran towards the light within the portal.
Nightshade (voiced by Gavin Hammon) – A dark-elemental feline-like thief that only appears at the "Midnight Museum" Adventure Pack. Nightshade is by far the most famous burglar in the history of Skylands. He also happens to be very smooth, charming, and old-school cool. Having been born rich, Nightshade doesn't need the treasure he so expertly steals. He only does it to show off how awesome he is. One day, Nightshade snuck into the high security Midnight Museum to steal the Dark Eye of Tomorrow in order to steal everything in Skylands. The Skylanders attempted to retrieve the Dark Eye before it could fall into the wrong hands, but Nightshade beat them to it and snatched the artifact before making his escape. After the Skylanders defeated the security forces of the museum, Nightshade was cornered by the heroes and engaged them in a fight. During the battle, Nightshade used the shadows of the pillars to inflict damage to the Skylanders and created shadow clones of himself to confuse and harm them. Despite this advantage, Nightshade was defeated and accepted capture with dignity.
The Gulper (voiced by Jamieson Price) – A water-elemental anthropomorphic blob who is one of the Doom Raiders. From the moment he oozed from the ceiling of the Gelatinous Caverns, the Gulper had possessed an enormous appetite and insatiable thirst for anything and everything he could stuff in his mouth. At a young age, he won first place in the annual Deep-Fried Triple-Cheeseburger eating contest and has proudly worn the Crown of Gluttony ever since. But it was his particular affinity for soda which causes him to grow to colossal proportions and go on rampages....an action thatst caught the eye of the Golden Queen. She was looking for special types of people or creatures to join her Doom Raider gang that was bent on unleashing total mayhem. It was also her desire to recruit someone who was incredibly dim-witted so that if they were ever captured, the Skylanders would not be able to extract any useful information. Gulper fit these requirements to a tee! After escaping from Cloudcracker Prison, Gulper attacked Soda Springs where he started drinking all of its soda. The Skylanders were able to destroy the soda vats and defeat the Gulper. When at Skylanders Academy, the Gulper asks where the bathroom is so that he can know before it's too late. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, the Gulper appears in the Boss Pursuit race where defeating him will enable the players to unlock him for racing.
Wolfgang (voiced by J.P. Karliak) – An undead-elemental red muscular werewolf that wields a bony guitar. He serves as one of the Doom Raiders. He was once a handsome, brilliant musician set to marry a beautiful princess. Before the wedding, he planned to unveil his ultimate symphony to the greatest music aficionados in Skylands, convinced they would love it and instantly hail him as the best composer of all time. But they didn't. They hated it and even worse, it actually physically hurt when heard. Turns out Wolfgang had unintentionally discovered the musical note for pain. Being shunned like this drove Wolfgang utterly and completely mad where it physically transformed him into the werewolf he is today. With the princess no longer wanting to marry him, he turned to a life of crime terrorizing the royal subjects and using his evil music as a weapon. The Golden Queen took note of this and realized that Wolfgang could make a powerful ally....if she could control his rage and keep him in line. After Wolfgang had escaped from Cloudcracker Prison, he managed to capture Kaos and make off with him while the Skylanders were fighting Dr. Krankcase. The Skylanders trace Wolfgang to Time Town in order to turn back time. The Skylanders reach Wolfgang and Kaos in the clock tower where Wolfgang escapes into the timestream while the Skylanders rescue Kaos. The Skylanders follow Wolfgang into the Future of Skylands which he has conquered. After taking down Wolfgang's Big Bad Woofer before it could broadcast the loudest concert in history, the Skylanders defeat Wolfgang and free the Future of Skylands from his tyranny. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Wolfgang appears in the Boss Pursuit race where defeating him in a sky race will enable the players to unlock him for racing.

Eye Five – A light-elemental mutant creature with two eyes on the palms of its hands. He is the third villain the Skylanders encounter at Monster Marsh.
Eye Scream (voiced by Kimberly Brooks) – A dark-elemental mutant creature with an eye that she carries in her mouth. She is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at Monster Marsh.
Fisticuffs (voiced by Travis Willingham) – A dark-elemental Evilikin with extending fists. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at the Secret Sewers of Supreme Stink after the local Gillmen summoned him as part of determining whether or not the Skylanders were real heroes.
Grave Clobber (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) – An earth-elemental rock mummy who is one of Golden Queen's best warriors. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter in the Golden Desert. Grave Clobber commented that he wouldn't be caught dead in Skylander Academy.
Grinnade – A fire-elemental bomb with legs and a grinning face. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter during "Operation: Troll Rocket Steal."
Hood Sickle (voiced by J.B. Blanc) – An undead-elemental Reaper who wears a hood to hide his missing head. Strangely, glowing red eyes can still be seen under the hood. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at Telescope Towers when he is summoned by Dreamcatcher. Hood Sickle claimed that he knew Skaletones from way back in their Underworld days before they were cool.
Krankenstein – An air-elemental Evilikin with a vacuum-like arm. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at Mystery Mill. Krankenstein develops a liking to Mags since he heard that she has eyes for monsters.
Lob Goblin – A light-elemental troll who throws electrical bombs. He is found only in the "Nightmare Express" Adventure Pack.
Mab Lobs (voiced by Cam Clarke) – A tech-elemental evil Mabu supersoldier who appears in the "Mirror of Mystery" Adventure Pack.
Masker Mind – An undead-elemental ghost with the ability to control enemies. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at Rainfish Riviera.
Pain-Yatta (voiced by John DiMaggio) – A magic-elemental piñata monster who vomits confetti and candy and attacks with a lollipop. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter at Telescope Towers.
Rage Mage (voiced by Oliver Vaquer) – A magic-elemental wizard. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at the Secret Sewers of Supreme Stink.
Scrap Shooter – A fire-elemental Evilikin that speaks like a stereotypical criminal by having the word "see" at the end of almost every sentence he says. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at Wilikin Workshop.
Sheep Creep – A life-elemental sheep with cork pop guns who was incarcerated at Cloudcracker Prison for leading an unlucky sheep rebellion. He is the first capturable villains the Skylanders encounter, during the Gulper's attack on Soda Springs.
Shield Shredder (voiced by Tom Kenny) – A life-elemental Evilikin. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter at Mystic Mill.
Riot Shield Shredder – A life-elemental Shield Shredder with a crimson forehead protector that was an E3 exclusive.

Shrednaught – A tech-elemental troll duo in a lumberjack tank. The first troll is the brains of the duo while the second troll operates the chainsaw vehicle. They are the first villains the Skylanders encounter at the Phoenix Psanctuary.
Steampunk Shrednaught - A blue version of them.

Slobber Trap (voiced by Gregg Berger) – A water-elemental Rock Dog. He is the third villain the Skylanders encounter on Know-It-All Island.
Smoke Scream (voiced by Cam Clarke) – A fire-elemental troll that rides in a large, two-legged machine that can blow fire. The Skylanders encounter him at the Ultimate Weapon. Smoke Scream asked if they have fire insurance for Skylander Academy just in case he "has an accident."
Tae Kwon Crow – A dark-elemental ninja crow who serves as leader of the air pirates, formally known as The Great Hawkmongous. The Skylanders encounter him in the Skyhighlands and played Skystones Smash with him twice before fighting him.
Threatpack (voiced by Wally Wingert) – A water-elemental troll scientist in a water-powered jet pack, formally known as Professor Nilbog. He is the second villain the Skylanders encounter during "Operation: Troll Rocket Steal" where he was the head of a troll secret base.
Trolling Thunder – A tech-elemental troll that operates a large troll-shaped tank. He is found only in the "Nightmare Express" Adventure Pack. A comment by Trolling Thunder mentioned that he never liked the Doom Raiders since there is no discipline among them and that they don't have any trolls in their membership.
Tussle Sprout – An earth-elemental brussels sprout. He is the first villain the Skylanders encounter on Know-It-All Island. Tussle Sprout is allergic to vortexes and the air at Skylander Academy.
Red Hot Tussle Sprout - A red version of him.


== Other charactersEdit ==
Master Eon (voiced by Daniel Hagen) – A human and veteran Portal Master who is one of the main supporting characters of the game guiding the player. As a humble servant boy, Eon started his life polishing pans in the kitchen of the Portal Master Nattybumpo. When he was eight years old, it was realized that Eon was no ordinary boy when he accidentally activated Nattybumpo's portal and teleported him into the middle of The Dirt Seas. Over the years, Master Eon became the greatest among the Portal Masters. He recruited many of the Skylanders to be the legendary champions of their world they are today seeing their potential and unique abilities that are capable of fighting the evil in Skylands. He led the Skylanders to protect the Core of Light and their world from the forces of darkness. Eventually, Eon became the last good Portal Master and grew weaker with age as time passed and he knew that it was only a matter of time before The Darkness would return one day. Following the Core of Light exploding in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure, Master Eon was pulled into his own portal where he no longer appears in his true form and is forever locked in the space between realms as a spiritual-like floating head. Since then, Master Eon has acted as a guide to the new Portal Masters.
Ancient Elementals – The Ancient Elementals are giant creatures that reside in the different parts of the Cloudbreak Islands as seen in Skylanders: Swap Force. Once every hundred years, they gather to the peak of the Cloudbreak Volcano to perform a ritual that will replinish all the magic in Skylands. The Ancient Elementals were targeted by Kaos and Kaos' Mom as part of a plot to disrupt their ritual.
Flashfin – Flashfin is a giant fish that serves as the protector of Mudwell Hollow.
Frosthound – The Frosthound is a large dog-like creature that resides in the Frostfest Mountains. The Frosthound was captured by Mesmerelda. After the Skylanders defeated Mesmerelda, they rescued the Frosthound.
Terrasquid – Terrasquid is a large squid-like creature that resides in the Twisty Tunnels. The Terrasquid used its tentacles to protect the Skylanders from the Fire Viper's fire attacks during their fight with it.
Tree Spirit – The Tree Spirit is a plant-like creature that resides in the Phantasm Forest.

Arbo (voiced by Tom Kenny impersonating Ed Wynn) – An Ent who helps the Skylanders find the Life Seeds and the Eternal Life Source. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Arbo is seen near certain Traptanium Gates at Know-It All Island.
Auric (voiced by Steven Blum) – A bear who works as a banker. He is based off Moneybags the Bear.
Avril (voiced by Elle Newlands in a Scottish accent) – Avril is a Frost Elf who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. She is the Captain of the Frost Elf Guard on Boney Island (which is part of the Cloudbreaker Islands) after her tactical mind and her trademark exploring slider had impressed the Snow King. Avril meets the Skylanders when they help her find the Ancient Frosthound. However, she was in the middle of evacuating her people from the Boney Islands due to a Cyclops attack and the Skylanders were able to assist her. Later on, she went with the Skylanders to Winter Keep and helped Duff and the other Frost Elves fight off a Cyclops invasion.
Barkin – A bulldog that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He was the first inhabitant of Woodburrow to be rescued by the Skylanders at Mount Cloudbreak. Before the fight against the Chompies in the Trapping Pit, Barkin mentioned that he was claustrophobic in his cage.
Batterson (voiced by Neil Kaplan) – A Molekin who is known for selling pies to the ghosts in the Darklight Crypt until Occulous outlawed them. In Skylanders: Giants, he appeared in Shroomboom's Heroic Challenge called "Baking With Batterson" where he helped Batterson collect all fruits to his pie.
Hatterson (voiced by Neil Kaplan) – Batterson's brother who sells hats to the Skylander.

Blind Beard (voiced by Marc Graue) – Blind Beard is a blind pirate crab who appears in the "Sheep Wreck Island" pack of Skylanders: Swap Force. He was the one who told the Skylanders about the Sheep Mage's sheep rebellion.
Blobbers (voiced by Cam Clarke) – Blobbers is a Mabu that the Skylanders encounter on Shattered Island. In Skylanders: Giants, Blobbers was drawn to Cutthroat Carnival where he thought was the last known place where one could purloin a churro. The Pirates told Blobbers that if he worked for them, he could eat all the churros he wanted. The instant Blobbers heard that, he hastily signed a contract without first finding out how much the job paid (which turned out to be nothing) and what his hour would be (which turned out to be all of them with no days off). Thus, another bad decision sealed by Blobbers. When the Skylanders arrived in Cutthroat Carnival, Blobbers wanted them to take him back to their ship to get out of the carnival. However, when Flynn was discovered not paying back a Seadog Pirate named Bowers, the Skylanders were forced to flee back to the Dread-Yacht, leaving Blobbers behind. Blobbers also appeared in Bouncer's Heroic Challenge, where he had gotten lost inside a dungeon. The player must first find him, then, roll him back to the exit (as while the Skylander was trying to find food for him, he found some and ate so much he became a bloated ball). In Skylanders: Trap Team, Blobbers appears again on Know-It-All Island. After getting himself into another situation due to his poor-decision making, he guides the Skylanders through parts of the island until the presence of Trolls caused him to step aside and allow Buzz to guide them. He appears later in the Skylanders Academy being part of Kaos' Quest. He joins a baking contest where he mentions Batterson and Chef Pepper Jack. Blobbers asks the Skylander to find the "most evil being in Skylands, not evil BEAN". Kaos then makes a cake dubbed the "Kaos Kake". Blobbers thanks Kaos, then Kaos transforms into Evolved Kaos.
Zeta Blobbers (voiced by Cam Clarke) – Zeta Blobbers is a Mabu who is the descendant of Blobbers in Skylanders: Trap Team that resides in the The Future of Skylands. Zeta Blobbers is the leader of the Resistance in the fight against Emperor Wolfgang.

Blocker Birds (voiced by Andrew Kishino) – Blocker Birds are purple birds that reside in the Phoenix Psanctuary. They are the protectors of the Phoenix Chicken, and use their bladed wings to block and prevent the Skylanders from progressing. However they like eating Boingo Nuts and are capable of breaking through caged barriers just to get to them. At least one Blocker Bird will play Skystone Smash with the Skylanders.
Brock (voiced by Troy Baker) – Brock is a large Goliath Drow that appears in Skylanders: Giants. He had captured Ermit as a way to lure the Skylanders to an arena of Cyclopes. The Skylanders defeat Brock, who then joins the Skylanders aboard the Dread-Yacht where he offers them challenges. He also wears a Viking Helmet, distinguishing him from the other Goliath Drow. Brock does reappear in Skylanders: Trap Team where he is once again doing and hosting Arena Challenges at Skylanders Academy.
Buzz (voiced by Travis Willingham) – Buzz is a cat-like Mabu who first appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. He is the head of security and secret ninja commando operations. Buzz sports an eyepatch over his right eye and has a left peg leg in place of the lower part of the left leg. He was in the middle of dedicating the new Skylanders academy until Soda Springs was attacked by Gulper.
Cali (voiced by Sumalee Montano) – A lynx-like Mabu who helps the Skylanders by offering them Heroic Challenges to train them. Flynn also has a crush on her.
Chieftess (voiced by Candi Milo) – The Chieftess is a fox who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. She is the lead elder of Woodburrow and treats Tessa as a daughter figure. The Chieftess, the Gillman Councillor, and the Yeti Councillor were taken by the Greebles when Woodburrow was attacked. During captivity, the Chieftess was forced to tell Kaos the locations of where the Ancient Elementals resided before she and her colleagues were rescued by the Skylanders in Cascade Glade. During the Skylanders' travels, the Chieftess used her and the Skylanders' magic to summon Master Eon to Woodburrow before tasking them to save the Elementals from Kaos' forces. When all the Elementals returned to Woodburrow, the Chieftess announced Tessa as her successor to lead Woodburrow. She was soon distraught when Tessa was kidnapped by Kaos' Mom and pleaded to the Skylander to save her. Once the Skylanders rescued Tessa and defeated Kaos, the Chieftess celebrated their victory along with the other villagers.
Cloudbreather Dragon - The Cloudbreather Dragon (also known as the Cloudbreather) is a massive, magical dragon that resides in the Cloudscraper Mountains as seen in Skylanders: SuperChargers. He holds the ability to locate anyone or anything in Skylands by sniffing out the personal item from whoever the person is looking for. On the back of the Dragon is the Sacred Dragon Temple. Without it, no one would be able to speak with the Cloudbreather. When the Skylanders sought to speak with the Cloudbreather Dragon for the location of Master Eon, the Dark Drow had overruned the surrounding village of the mountain and launched an attack on the creature, seeking to control him. They were soon thwarted allowing the Skylanders to talk with the Cloudbreather who was able to tell the current whereabouts of Master Eon by sniffing the Portal Master's remaining possession....his sock.
Crossbones – A skeleton who first appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. He is the leader of the Skaletones and will ask the Skylanders to beat different characters in rap battles.
Da Pinchy (voiced by Roger Craig Smith in an Italian accent) – Da Pinchy is a Mabu who appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. He is an artist that resides in Time Town. Da Pinchy later helps the Skylanders get to the Future of Skylands in order to stop Wolfgang. He also sets up the villain quests for Cuckoo Clocker at Phoenix Psanctuary and Trolling Thunder at the "Nightmare Express" adventure pack.
Diggs – A Molekin who helps the Skylanders find the Crystal Eye, the Eternal Earth Source, the Crucible of The Ages and the Eternal Fire Source. In Skylanders: Trap Team, he sets up the villain quests for Grinnade at Skyhighlands and Blaster-Tron at the Golden Desert.
Duff (voiced by Carlos Alazraqui in a Scottish accent) – Duff is a Frost Elf leader who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is a friend of Avril who leads the hostile attack against the hostile forces at Winter Keep.
Ermit – Ermit is an unspecified gremlin-like creature that appears in Skylanders: Giants. He was the first to see Kaos's return to Skylands and was later captured by Brock in order to use as bait to draw the Skylanders to him. The Skylanders then rescued him when Brock was defeated. He won Machine Ghost in a game of Skystones a long time ago and used him to help the Skylanders defeat Robo-Kaos.
Fargus – A Mabu who is the eldest of the Mystic Seekers. He appears only in the 3DS version of Skylanders.
Wendel (voiced by Anthony Hansen) – He is the son of Fargus. He appears only in the 3DS version of Skylanders.

Fizzy (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) – Fizzy (also known as Fiznik) is a four-armed Yeti who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He resides on Cloudbreaker Islands' Frostfest Mountains as the Head Greeter. Fizzy has apparently known Sharpfin prior to the story events of Skylanders: Swap Force.
Flam Bam – Flam Bam is a Red Dragon who appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. Flam Bam resides in the Secret Sewers of Supreme Stink. He first appeared in a hatch near the beginning of the level offering Chomp Chest's villain quest. Flam Bam later appears inside the sewers wanting to play a game of Skystone Smash to see if he remembered being the Skystone Smash champion.
Flavius (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) – Flavius is a red dragon who appears in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure and Skylanders: Giants. Flavius takes the Skylanders to Dragon's Peak. He isn't the brightest of dragons, but he is extremely loyal to Ramses.
Fleesly – Fleesly is a fox that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. The Skylanders encounter Fleesly at Mount Cloudbreak near Woodburrow where he tells them about the SWAP Force Zones.
Flynn (voiced by Patrick Warburton) – A bobcat-like Mabu who transports the Skylanders in his hot-air balloon to the first three levels of the game to find the Eternal Air Source. He appears at the parties of the two games along with Cali whom he has a crush on. He is also the captain of the Dread-Yacht.
Gallant – Gallant is a ghost who is one of the inhabitants of the Darklight Crypt as seen in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure and Skylanders: Giants. He was notable for helping the Skylanders fight Occulous.
General Robot – A robot in charge of the Mabu Defense Force. He helped the Skylanders find the Golden Gear, the Glowing Green Goo of Primordia and the Eternal Tech Source. In Skylanders: Giants, General Robot appears in Fright Rider's Heroic Challenge.
Clam-tron 4000 (voiced by Keith Silverstein) – A large robot that can make bombs from clams. He is the son of General Robot. In Skylanders: Giants, Clam-tron 4000 appears in the Secret Vault of Secrets at the Tech elemental gate. He later appeared in the The Oracle in the Trial of Speed, where he challenges the Skylander to Skystones. Clam-tron 4000 also appeared in Fright Rider's Heroic Challenge.

Giant Tiki – Giant Tiki is a resident of Tiki Island in the 3DS version of Skylanders: Giants He helps the Skylanders find the first clue in exchange that they rescue his tiki friend from the pirates. In the 3DS version of Skylanders: Swap Force, the Giant Tiki appears where he was employed by a Molekin in Boom Town.
Gigantus (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) – Gigantus is a giant Rock Golem that appears in Skylanders: Giants. He helped the players by demonstrating some of the abilities Giants can do.
Gillman Councillor – The Gillman Councillor is a male-voiced female gillman who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is one of the elders of Woodburrow alongside the Chieftess and the Yeti Councillor. The Greebles attacked Woodburrow where the elders are captured by the Greebles and held at Cascade Glade. Whenever the Gillman Councillor sees Greebles, she burps bubbles.
Gurglefin – A green Gillman with overalls who transports the Skylanders using his ship to get the Twin Spouts of Ocea-Major-Minor and the Eternal Water Source.
Haldor – Haldor is a dwarf wizard who resides in the Empire of Ice.
Headwick (voiced by David Boat impersonating Peter Lorre) – A strange-looking purple unspecified creature with a candle holder on his head that appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. He was first seen in the Monster Marsh and later helps the Skylanders at Telescope Towers.
HipBros – The HipBros are two hippopotamus brothers who appear in Skylanders: Swap Force. They originated from the jungles of Cascade Glade. The HipBros opened their first shop together at a young age and their contrasting personalities proved for a booming business. The HipBros soon moved to the capital city of Woodburrow and haven't looked back since. The Skylanders first meet them where they repair the HipBros' Power Pod and rebuild their shop.
Gorm (voiced by Travis Willingham) – The youngest of the HipBros. He fancies his strength much to the dismay of Tuk.
Tuk (voiced by Steven Blum) – The oldest of the HipBros who is squat and feisty. He is shown to be annoyed by Gorm yet is very protective of him (which he doesn't like to admit).

Hugo (voiced by Michael Yurchak) – A mole-like Mabu who is Master Eon's assistant and is also friends with Flynn.
Information – Information (also known as Info) is a large robot who appeared in the 3DS version of Skylanders: Giants. He was originally a robot employee unit who was stationed in the Tech Theme Park in the "Walk in the Park" level. The Skylanders come to him for information on a waterfall that used to be before the park was made where the clue leading to the Chest of Exile was hidden. When Information refused to reveal details about the waterfall, Hugo offered the robot to work for them back on the Dread-Yacht if he tells them where the waterfall is to which Information eagerly accepted the offer for position of "cruise director". In the 3DS version of Skylanders: Swap Force, Information is shown to have become the curator of the Skylands Museum.
James Prong - James Prong is a gillman that appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers.
Little Bro Pete – Little Bro Pete is a fox that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is encountered in the Life Elemental Gate at Mount Cloudbreak near Woodburrow where he asks the Life Skylanders to rescue his three Sheep that wandered off and got themselves caught in Prickly Pastures while fighting Lt. Woalf and his Greeble Screwballs. Once Little Bro Pete's sheep have been rescued, he gives the Skylanders a Stovepipe Hat to wear on their way to Woodburrow. His name is a homage to Little Bo Peep.
Machine Ghost – Machine Ghost is an Arkeyan Ghost that appears in Skylanders: Giants. He first appears as a ghost who lives in the body of a blue Arkeyan War Machine. The Skylander finds him in Glacier Gully separated from his body and help him reunite with it. At the end of the Secret Arkeyan Vault of Secrets, Machine Ghost shields the Skylander from an avalanche with his robotic body, sustaining heavy damage in the process. Before his death, he tells the Skylander on where Kaos was planning to go next after overhearing him inside the vault. Later on in the game, Ermit repairs him.
Mabu Defense Force – The Mabu Defense Force is a military army formed by Mabu in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure who are forced to take action when evil threatens their way of life. The army is dedicated to defending other Mabu and the peace. General Robot is the commander of the Mabu Defense Force. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Buzz enlists the Mabu Defense Force to help the Skylanders. The Mabu Defense Force is shown to be capable of holding their own against enemies for a short while where they can also take down obstacles and build platforms for the Skylanders to reach certain areas.
Nort – A Mabu who encounters the Skylander in Shattered Island. He is one of the Mabu soldiers that joined the Mabu Defense Force.
Rizzo (voiced by John Kassir) – A Mabu who encounters the Skylanders in Shattered Island. He is one of the Mabu trapped behind the locked gate in the area Market Curve.
Snuckles (voiced by Cam Clarke) – A Mabu who is the first character the Skylanders meet. Later on in the game, he becomes a secret agent who works for the Mabu Defense Force founded by Rizzo and led by General Robot.

Mags (voiced by Eliza Schneider) – An unspecified creature who is undead and who debuts in Skylanders: Trap Team. She is an inventor who works at the Skylander Academy and helps the Skylanders find her information squid at Rainfish Riveria. At the Sunscraper Spire adventure pack, Luminous takes the form of her to fool the Skylanders into releasing him. He laters comments on her, hoping "there are no hard feelings for Mags" after he "impersonated her".
Marsha – A sweet fairy who appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. She helps the Skylanders by guiding them through the poisonous swamp and activating a protective barrier in Monster Marsh. She resembles to Persephone.
Marshall Wheelock (voiced by Scott Whyte) – A Dirt Shark sheriff that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is the "long teeth of the law" in Iron Jaw Gulch on the Cloudbreaker Islands.
Mayor LeGrand – A Mabu who is the Mayor of Plunder Island and the father of Jess LeGand.
Jess LeGrand – A lynx-like Mabu who lives on Plunder Island in the Pirate Seas and is the daughter of Mayor LeGrand. She seeks out the Skylanders when her island is threatened by Captain Dreadbeard. She has the same character model as Cali with the exception of her drooped ears, claws and darker color.

Moonbeam – A troll who appears in the "Mirror of Mystery" Adventure Pack in Skylanders: Trap Team.
Mr. Yappy – Mr. Yappy is a fox from Woodburrow that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. When encountered by the Skylanders near Woodburrow, Mr. Yappy tells the Skylanders about the Elemental Gates.
Ms. Poppy – Ms. Poppy is a fox from Woodburrow that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. She is among the inhabitants of Woodburrow to be captured by the Greebles at Mount Cloudbreak and the second inhabitant that the Skylanders encounter. Upon being freed, Ms. Poppy and the other freed foxes freed the other caged creatures.
Norticus – A Mabu who was notable for helping the Giant Skylanders free his fellow Mabu from the Arkeyan Conquertron. He is also the ancestor of a different Nort.
Nort-Tron – Nort-Tron is a Mabu who is the descendant of Nort in Skylanders: Trap Team that resides in the The Future of Skylands. Upon arrival, he deduces that the Skylanders (who have been absent for 10,000) were heroes and asks of them to defeat Wolfgang.
Octavius Cloptimus – Octavius Cloptimus is a blue alien-like creature with no physical form in time and space that appears in Skylanders: Giants. He has been referred to as the Oracle and resides in the Molekin Mountain.
Otoro – A yellow Gill-man with a duffle brown coat with a turned up collar who encounters the Skylanders on Oilspill Island in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure.
Persephone (voiced by Laura Bailey) – A fairy who helps the Skylanders by upgrading their powers and abilities.
Pomfrey - Pomfrey (also known as Pomfrey Lefuzzbuttom) is a small bookworm author that appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers. He is the original founder of the Warrior Librarians of the Eternal Archives and notably the author of many books in the Spell Punk Library (including ones regarding the history of The Darkness). He retired to Gadfly Glades to continue his work in solitude, but was caught by an elven Collector and put on display against his will.
Queen Cumulus - Queen Cumulus is a storm giant that first appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers. She is the queen of the Cloud Kingdom.
Quigley (voiced by Hope Levy) – A young Mabu and one of the inhabitants of the Ruins that appears in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure. In Skylanders: Trap Team, Quigley attends the Skylanders Academy in hopes of becoming a Skylander.
Q.U.I.G.L.E.Y. – Q.U.I.G.L.E.Y. is a Mabu who is the future descendant of Quigley in Skylanders: Trap Team that resides in The Future of Skylands.
Pandergast (voiced by Max Mittelman) - Pandergast is an infamous racing promoter who appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers. He is the host of the Skylands Speedway called the Ridepocalypse Demo Dergy. In the 3DS version, Pandergast is the host of the Racelandia racing event.
Ramses – A green dragon who is the king of the dragons that live on Dragon's Peak.
Rizzopolus (voiced by John Kassir) – A Mabu who was notable for helping the Giant Skylanders free his fellow Mabu from the Arkeyan Conquertron. He is also the ancestor of Rizzo.
Rufus (voiced by Rick D. Wasserman) – Rufus is a cougar-like creature from Woodburrow who appeared in Skylanders: Swap Force. He serves as the village official and town crier in Woodburrow.
Seraphina (voiced by Tara Strong) – Seraphina is a Wilikin child that appears in Skylanders: Giants. She joined the Skylanders in their quest after they helped to drive the Chompy Mage from Wilikin Village. After they defeated the Chompy Mage, she builds a turret on the Dread-Yacht for the Skylanders to use whenever they're attacked by enemies.
Sharpfin (voiced by Dave B. Mitchell) – Sharpfin is a blue Dirt Shark who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is the baron of Motleyville and pilots a slim airship that goes "three times the speed of awesome." Sharpfin is rumored to be the wealthiest individual of the Cloudbreak Islands. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Sharpfin helps the Skylanders by as the Skylander Academy's head mechanic. He is assisted by Fender, Socket, and Clyde who work as Sharpfin's pit crew.
Ship Master (voiced by Cam Clarke) – A Mabu is one of the Inhabitants of the Pirate Seas who takes any of the Skylanders to Plunder Island.
Snagglescale (voiced by Mitch Urban in a southern accent) – Snagglescale is a Gill-man who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. Despite claiming that he is a "strong and silent type," Snagglescale has the tendency to talk over a long period of time. Snagglescale claims to have been a great gladiator who would've won 100 matches but the scoreboards didn't go over 99 so it forced him to retire. He offers arena battles for the Skylanders in Woodburrow.
Snuckles X-9 (voiced by Cam Clarke) – Snuckles X-9 is a Mabu who is the descendant of Snuckles in Skylanders: Trap Team that resides in The Future of Skylands. He helps the Skylanders get to Zeta Blobbers when Wolfgang took over The Future of Skylands.
Softpaw (voiced by Yuri Lowenthal) – Softpaw is a fox who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is a super-spy who gives the heroes the Scout Hazards to Evade and Escape Poncho (codename S.H.E.E.P) to help hide the Skylanders from security bots. Softpaw also has a sheep disguise on his head. Before becoming a super-spy, Softpaw was a delivery driver for Sharpfin. In Skylanders: SuperChargers, Softpaw helps the Skylanders in their mission to the Land of the Undead when it comes to freeing Master Eon from Count Moneybone's clutches.
'Spellslamzer - Spellslamzer is a large Spell Punk who appears in Skylanders: SuperChargers. Spellslamzer was the crowned champion of Battlebrawl Island. He was sought out by the Skylanders for navigation around the Spell Punk Library.
Stone Heads (voiced by David Sobolov) – The Stone Heads are large stone tiki heads that float around and reside on Know-It-All Island as seen in Skylanders: Trap Team. They inform the player about the Doom Raiders and give money if the player listens.
T-Bone (voiced by Keith Silverstein) – A skeleton who helps the Skylanders find the Skull Mask and the Eternal Undead Source. He has a fear of spiders due to them stealing his bones. In Skylanders: Trap Team, T-Bone is a member of the Skaletones where he is the drummer.
Tessa (voiced by Kari Wahlgren) – A fox from Woodburrow who first appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. Tessa spent her life reading and dreaming about adventure and the Skylanders. She met Whiskers when he was just a chick and rescued him from a slobbering pack of Chompies. Since then, she and Whiskers have protected the creatures of Cloudbreak Islands with Tessa being known as the best flyer around. She met Flynn and the Skylanders at the time when her village Woodburrow was under attack by the Greebles. After the Skylanders defeated Kaos and rescued the Ancient Elementals, Kaos' Mom appeared and kidnapped Tessa. She was later rescued by the Skylanders, Flynn, Whiskers, and Sharpfin before the volcano on the Cloudbreak Islands erupted. In Skylanders: Trap Team, the Skylanders and Flynn met with Tessa and Whiskers again at the Phoenix Psanctuary where Tessa had arrived to help protect the Phoenix Chicken that was being threatened by Chef Pepper Jack. Despite their efforts, Chef Pepper Jack managed to steal one of the Phoenix Chicken's eggs and planned to use it to release his omelette of doom on Skylands. Tessa followed the Skylanders back to the Skylanders Academy where she continued to lend her assistance to the Skylanders throughout their journey.
Time Keepers (voiced by Enn Reitel) – The Time Keepers are a group of Kangarats that keep watch over the Tower of Time in Clock Town. They are experienced in time manipulation and have created devices used to freeze and start time. The Skylanders had to help the Time Keepers when the Tower of Time was taken over by Cluck.
Verl (voiced by Wally Wingert) – Verl is a Gill-man who appears in Skylanders: Trap Team. Centuries ago, he along with several other Gillmen locked themselves in the sewers to escape from the Great Germ Outbreak. Verl is paranoid of outsiders where he greatly fears that they are unclean and filled with germs.
Warrior Librarians of the Eternal Archives – The Warrior Librarians of the Eternal Archives are worms in robot suits that are the keepers of the most dangerous books ever written in Skylands as seen in the 3DS version of Skylanders: Trap Team.
Wiggleworth – Wiggleworth is a worm who is one of the Warrior Librarians of the Eternal Archives.

Weapon Master (voiced by Neil Kaplan) – An Arkeyan who laid dormant on an isolated island in the waters of the Ruins for 10,000 years who woke up to help the Skylanders retrieve the Quicksilver and the Eternal Magic Source. In Skylanders: Giants, the Weapon Master appeared again in Secret Vault of Secrets and Autogyro Adventure as a projection offering the Skylanders optional Skystone challenges. He appeared later in the Lost City of Arkus as a recording giving out information to the Skylander on the Arkeyan history.
Whiskers – Whiskers is a large bird who is a companion of Tessa and serves as her primary mode of transportation.
Willowbark (voiced by Jim Piddock in a British accent) – Willowbark is a Treeman who appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He first appeared in Rampant Ruins where he explained to the Skylander that a villain had made off with his group's rare finds and was using the Petrified Darkness to evilize the local Sugarbats. He appeared again in Fantasm Forest where it was revealed that he is the Fire chief of the Volunteer Fire Brigade.
Wixxon – Wixxon is a fox that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. The Skylanders encounter Wixxon at the first Air Elemental Gate at Mount Cloudbreak near Woodburrow. He has the Air Skylanders show him how to operate a cannon in order to shoot 50 Bombers. After the Bombers are destroyed, Wixxon gives the Skylanders a Winged Sapphire.
Yeti Councillor (voiced by Jess Harnell) – The Yeti Councillor is a four-armed Yeti that appears in Skylanders: Swap Force. He is among the elders of Woodburrow alongside the Chieftess and the Gillman Councillor. The Greebles attacked Woodburrow where they captured the elders and held them at Cascade Glade. The Skylanders were able to rescue the Yeti Councillor, the Chieftess, and the Gillman Councillor.


== ReferencesEdit ==