Universiti Putra Malaysia (formally known as Universiti Pertanian Malaysia or College of Agriculture Malaya or School of Agriculture), or UPM, is recognised by the independent government assessments as one of Malaysia's leading research Universities. Founded in 1931 as the School of Agriculture, the University today combines impressive modern facilities and a dynamic approach to teaching and research with its proud heritage of quality services and achievements. UPM main campus located in central Peninsular Malaysia, close to the capital city, Kuala Lumpur and next to Malaysia’s administrative capital city, Putrajaya. It was formerly known as Universiti Pertanian Malaysia or Agricultural University of Malaysia. UPM is a research university offering undergraduate and postgraduate courses with a research focus on agricultural sciences and its related fields. It was ranked as the joint 376th best university in the world in 2014 by Quacquarelli Symonds. On 2015, UPM was ranked 45th in Best Global Universities for Agricultural Sciences of U.S. News & World Report College and University Ranking.


== History ==
The School of Agriculture was officially instituted on 21 May 1931 by John Scott, an administrative officer of the British colonial Straits Settlements. The school was located on a 22-acre piece of land in Serdang and offered two programmes - a three-year diploma programme and a one-year certificate course in Agriculture. In 1947, the school was declared the College of Agriculture Malaya by Sir Edward Gent, the then Governor of the Malayan Union. The establishment of Universiti Pertanian Malaysia came about when the College of Agriculture in Serdang merged with the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Malaya. Dr. Mohd. Rashdan bin Haji Baba, the then principal of the College of Agriculture Malaya, was appointed as the first Vice-Chancellor by virtue of the provisions of Section 18 of the Universities and University Colleges Act, 1971. With the first intake of 1,559 students, Universiti Pertanian Malaysia had its first academic session in July 1973 in the three central faculties and one basic division: the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Forestry, Faculty of Agriculture, and a Division of Foundation Studies. In the early 80s, UPM extended its area of studies to include the field of Science and Technology (S&T). In 1997, the name Universiti Pertanian Malaysia was changed to Universiti Putra Malaysia by former Prime Minister, Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohammad, as a strategic gesture to portray the status of UPM as a centre of higher education capable of providing various fields of studies, especially in science and information technology, which facilitate national development in the new millennium.


== Campus ==

The university since its inception as Universiti Pertanian Malaysia, has had two branch campuses apart from the main campus at Serdang, Selangor. The UPM branch campuses were located in Bintulu, Sarawak and Mengabang Telipot, Terengganu. The campus in Terengganu has been upgraded to the University College of Science and Technology Malaysia (KUSTEM), with its own management and administration. KUSTEM officially broke away from UPM on 1 July 2001. The Medicine and Health Sciences faculty maintains a campus complex adjacent to a local hospital in Serdang.


== Academic profile ==
UPM began its academic life in 1973 with three founding Faculties and a Division of Basic Sciences. The first intake of 1,559 students were for the bachelor's degree in Agriculture, Diploma in Home Technology, Diploma in Animal Health and Production, Diploma in Science with Education, and Preliminary Programme. UPM now offers 59 bachelor programmes, 7 diploma programmes, and 12 Masters and Doctoral programmes. There are 16 Faculties, eight Centres, nine Institutes, two Schools, a University Park and a branch campus in Bintulu, Sarawak. The Doctor of Medicine program provided by the Medical and Health Science division of the university was fully recognised by the Malaysia Medical Council on 5 June 2001.


== Faculties ==
Faculty of Engineering
The Faculty of Engineering of Universiti Putra Malaysia was established on 1 January 1975 at the main Serdang Campus, some 22 kilometres to the south of Kuala Lumpur. It is one of the largest faculties at UPM with a student population of over 3000. The campus’ location at the heart of the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) provides the faculty with access to the array of IT and multimedia facilities available in the Corridor.
The eight academic departments housed in the faculty offer a similar number of Bachelor of Engineering degree programs. Out of 800 postgraduates, almost 50% are international students. In addition to providing facilities and opportunities for teaching and research, the faculty has established Research Centres in engineering and related fields.
The Centres of Excellence organise research and development programs, consultancy and professional training using expertise from disciplines in the university. The objective is to secure contracts from the public or private sectors to generate income for the faculty. Centers of Excellence have been established as listed below.
Road Safety Research Center (RSRC)
Housing Research Center (HRC)
Mountainous Terrain Development Research Center (MTDRC)
Centre of Excellence for Wireless and Photonic Network (WiPNET)
Centre of Excellence on Lightning Protection (CELP)
The Eighth Malaysia Plan ended in 2005 and, during its duration, most of the approved research projects were completed. Under the Ninth Malaysia Plan, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation offers three research grants: Technofund, Innofund and Sciencefund. In addition, the Ministry of Higher Education initiated the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme and UPM offers the Research University Grant Scheme.
Faculty of Engineering comprises eight main departments:
Aerospace
Biological and Agricultural
Civil
Electric and Electronic
Chemical and Environment
Computer and Communication Systems
Mechanical and Manufacturing
Process and Food.
Faculty of Science
The Faculty of Science was established as the Division of Basic Sciences in 1972. Its objective was to offer basic science courses required by other faculties in the University. In 1975, the status of the division was upgraded to a faculty, and named the Faculty of Science and Environmental Studies.
Since then the faculty has set up the Department of Environmental Sciences and the Department of Computer Sciences which later were upgraded to form two new faculties, and the transfer of the Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology to the newly formed Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences. Ever since the restructuring, the faculty has been renamed as the Faculty of Science in 2004.
Faculty of Science comprises four main departments and one centre:
Department of Biology
Department of Physics
Department of Chemistry
Department of Mathematics
Catalysis Science and Technology Research Centre (PutraCAT)
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
The Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences was established on 1 August 1996 as a result of the merger between the Department of Biomedical of the Faculty of Veterinary and Animal Science with Nutrition and Community Health Department of the Faculty Human Ecology. Currently, there are 1845 full-time students in the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences.
FMHS complex has many facilities which include administration building, library, lecture halls, tutorial rooms and laboratory. In addition, there are four blocks of students’ hostel which can accommodate 2000 students, student centre, food court and mosque.
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences comprises three main departments:
Department of Economics
Department of Management and Marketing
Department of Accounting and Finance
Faculty of Economics and Management
The Faculty of Economics and Management (FEP) (formerly known as The Faculty of Resource Economics and Agribusiness) was first established in January 1974, as the fourth faculty in Universiti Putra Malaysia (formerly known as Universiti Pertanian Malaysia). It was established in response to the needs for competent professionals in the fields of Agribusiness and Resource Economics.
Ever since its inception, FEP has grown in terms of students’ intake, number of academic programs offered, research activities, and professional services.
To cater to the educational needs of working adults, FEP established Executive Program Unit (UPE) in 1997 by offering part-time programs to candidates with working experience in public or private sector. This program has thus expanded through collaboration with Malaysian Airlines (MAS) Academy in the year 2000.
Within the same year, FEP established External Program Unit and Distance Learning Unit in 2001.
FEP offers three bachelor level programs: Bachelor of Accounting, Bachelor of Economics and Bachelor of Business Administration. At the graduate level, FEP offers Masters of Economics, Masters of Science and PhD in Economics.
Faculty of Economics and Management comprises three main departments:
Department of Economics
Department of Management and Marketing
Department of Accounting and Finance
Faculty of Agriculture
The Faculty of Agriculture is one of three founding faculties that made up the formation of Universiti Pertanian Malaysia (now Universiti Putra Malaysia) in 1971. Beginning with seven departments under this faculty, most of these departments were later developed to become several other faculties.
At the end of 1998, the faculty had three academic departments which are Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, Department of Plant Protection and Department of Soil Science.
Beginning from 1 January 1999, the restructuring process at Universiti Putra Malaysia involved the Faculty of Agriculture. The faculty now has six departments – Crop Science, Animal Science, Plant Protection, Land Management, Agribusiness and Information System, and Agriculture Technology.
Faculty of Agriculture comprises seven main departments:
Department Of Crop Science
Department Of Plant Protection
Department Of Land Management
Department Of Animal Science
Department Of Agribusiness and Information Systems
Department Of Agriculture Technology
Department Of Aquaculture
Faculty of Food Science and Technology
The Faculty of Food Science and Technology had its humble beginnings in 1976 with the establishment of the Department of Food Science and Technology under the Faculty of Agriculture. The establishment of the department is in line with the need of the country to fulfill the shortage of skilled employees in the field of science-based food. At that time, only one undergraduate program was offered: Bachelor of Food Science and Technology.
On 1 March 1982, the Department of Food Science and Technology was upgraded to the Faculty of Food Science and Technology. There were two (2) departments under the Faculty: Department of Food Technology and Department of Food Science. In 1986, the Faculty was renamed Faculty of Food Science and Biotechnology (FSMB) with the establishment of the Department of Biotechnology that offered the Bachelor of Science (Biotechnology) program with six (6) modules: Plant Biotechnology, Molecular Biotechnology, Food Biotechnology, Industrial Biotechnology and Environmental Biotechnology and Management.
In 1996, the Faculty began offering the Bachelor of Science (Food Studies) program with two options: Food Quality Management and Food Management. In 1997 and 2000, the Food Service Administration and Food Marketing options were offered through the same program. On 1 August 2004, the faculty was renamed to the Faculty of Food Science and Technology when the Department of Biotechnology formed a separate faculty. In January 2005, the Department of Food Service and Management was established to strengthen the existing programs in the Faculty. The Faculty began offering the Bachelor of Science (Food Service Management) and Master of Food Technology in September 2012.
Faculty of Food Science and Technology comprises three main departments:
Department of Food Science
Department of Food Technology
Department of Food Service and Management
Faculty of Forestry
The Faculty of Forestry is one of the founding faculties during the establishment of Universiti Putra Malaysia, formerly known as Universiti Pertanian Malaysia in 1971. The mission of the faculty is to be a centre of learning and education in the field of tropical forestry, which contributes not only to human advancement and the discovery of knowledge but also to the creation of wealth and development. To achieve this mission, the faculty has established, in the field of forest management, wood industry, recreation and eco-tourism, the following objectives, to:
Produce quality graduates to meet the nation’s manpower requirements
Produce specially trained forestry human resource through postgraduate programmes
Conduct relevant and advanced research for the development and sustainability of forest resources
Provide professional forestry services including the dissemination of knowledge
Faculty of Forestry comprises three main departments and one section:
Department of Forest Management
Department of Forest Production
Department of Recreation and Eco-tourism
Forest & Plantation Section
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
The Faculty of Veterinary Medicine strives toward excellence in teaching, research and professional services to expand knowledge in veterinary science for the enhancement of animal industry and comfort of animal and man.
To become an excellent faculty and referral centre in veterinary science in Asia Pacific.
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine comprises six main departments:
Department of Veterinary Pathology & Microbiology
Department of Pre-Clinical Veterinary
Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies
Department of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnostics
Department of Medicine Companion Animal Surgery
Department of Medicine and Exotic & Farm Animal Surgery
Faculty of Educational Studies
The Faculty of Educational Studies serves to produce teachers who can teach at the secondary school level as well as professionals who are responsible for human resource development. At present, the faculty offers Bachelor of Education degrees in Agricultural Science, Home Science, Physical Education, the Teaching of Bahasa Malaysia as the First Language, the Teaching of English as a Second Language, Guidance and Counselling as well as Information Technology.
The Faculty was established in order to:
Conduct teacher education, extension education and human resource development programmes
Coordinate graduate studies programmes related to teacher education
Conduct research related to education, extension and human resource development
Provide professional services and consultation to government, private and non-governmental agencies
Faculty of Educational Studies comprises six main departments:
Department of Foundations of Education
Department of Sport Studies
Department of Science and Technical Education
Department of Language and Humanities Education
Department of Professional Development and Continuing Education
Department of Counselor Education and Counseling Psychology
Faculty of Human Ecology
The Faculty of Human Ecology was officially established on 1 April through the merger of the Department of Human Development Studies from the Faculty of Agriculture with the Department of Social Sciences from the Faculty of Educational Studies. Four departments were then established, namely, the Department of Community Nutrition and Health, Department of Resource Management and Consumer Studies.
As its name implies, the Faculty of Human Ecology focuses on human beings as the pillars of progress and development of a country. As a social science based faculty its teaching and learning and research and professional services activities are aimed at enhancing the well-being of individuals, families and communities.
Currently, the faculty has five departments and apart from these departments an additional unit under the FHE administration is the External Education and Industrial Training Unit.
Faculty of Human Ecology comprises five main departments:
Department of Resource Management and Consumer Studies
Department of Human Development and Family Studies
Department of Social and Development Sciences
Department of Government and Civilization Studies
Department of Music
Faculty of Modern Languages & Communication
The formation of Faculty of Modern Languages & Communication can be traced back to the establishment of the National Language Division and the English Language Division in the Agriculture College of Malaya (Kolej Pertanian Malaya) when the Language Act 1976 took effect. Both units were combined to form the Language Division in 1971 which was subsequently upgraded into the Language Department in 1972 and was placed under the Faculty of Agriculture.
On 15 January 1975, the Language Department was placed at the Faculty of Educational Studies. Then, on 4 January 1995, the Language Department was upgraded to the Faculty of Language Studies. On 1 January 1999, the then Department of Development Communication which was in the Faculty of Human Ecology was transferred to the Faculty of Modern Languages as the Department of Communication. With this restructuring, the Faculty of Language Studies was renamed as the Faculty of Modern Languages and Communication (FBMK).
Currently, Faculty of Modern Languages & Communication comprises four main departments:
Department of Malay Language and Linguistics
Department of English Language
Department of Foreign Languages
Department of Communication
Faculty of Design & Architecture
The idea to establish the Faculty of Design and Architecture in UPM originated with a proposal paper entitled "Proposed Establishment of the Faculty of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture.", which was submitted to the Faculty Agriculture in 1976. However, the proposal was never brought up for further consideration by the Faculty’s administration. Nevertheless, a group of teaching staff in Landscape Architecture was recruited in 1980 to teach "landscape subjects" in both the diploma and bachelor of agriculture programmes. The first landscape course was offered in 1984. It was a 3 credit course entitled "AGRO 472 – An Approach to Landscape Design". It became a popular course and managed to attract many agricultural students who later graduated and continued their studies in landscape architecture at the undergraduate and graduate level overseas. Many of these early graduates have since returned and assumed successful practice or became professors at several institutions of higher learning in the country.
In 1991, the Faculty of Engineering, UPM proposed to offer the Architecture programme in UPM. However, the idea mooted never materialised until the Faculty of Agriculture was given the task by the University’s management to look into the feasibility of offering both landscape architecture and architecture in UPM. A committee was formed in the Faculty of Agriculture 1994 and in 1995 a report was sent to the then Vice-Chancellor proposing the setting up of a new faculty offering courses in design and the creative arts. With the strong support of the University’s management the Faculty of Design and Architecture was approved by the University’s Senate, Board of Directors and the Ministry of Education.
The new faculty was officially established on 26 June 1996 and began its operation with the offering of the Bachelor of Landscape Architecture and Master of Landscape Architecture programmes under the new Department of Landscape Architecture. Subsequently, the Department of Architecture was established in 1999 and later the Department of Industrial Design in 2002. Operating from a few wooden temporary buildings on a former horticultural nursery site, the faculty today is a complex of stylish buildings to house the faculty and students and an up to date learning facilities and equipments. The faculty began with an enrolment of 40 students. Today, it has expanded rapidly offering five programmes with an enrolment of more than 400 students at the undergraduate, master and doctoral levels.
Faculty of Design and Architecture comprises three main departments:
Landscape Architecture Department
Industrial Design Department
Architecture Department
Faculty of Computer Science & Information Technology
The global evolution and significance of Computer studies and research was strategically harnessed in UPM’s program offerings in the 1980s. Among the pertinent strategies to achieve this was to offer the Diploma and Bachelor of Computer Science courses. The exponential demand and expansion of the courses needed a dedicated administrative and academic structure. Thus, by 1992, in keeping with the rapid pace of information technology, the Department of Computer Science was established. Further, courses were designed and offered to synergise the needs and demands of the multitudes of students exemplifying the domestic and international market demands. These encompassed postgraduate studies and supervision for students in pursue of the Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy programmes.
In 1995, there was further innovation in the deployment of providing Computer studies in UPM. Thus, is realising the true essence of a borderless education, the Diploma and Bachelor of Computer Science was offered cooperatively between UPM and private educational institutions. This indeed realised the widening of UPM’s Computer studies spectrum.
In October 1998, the Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology was officially established to meet the demands for additional academic programmes and to keep pace with rapid developments in the respective field. The setting up of the Faculty also parallels the goal of the university to stay abreast of developments in Information Technology.
Currently, the faculty constitutes of four departments: Department of Multimedia, Department of Computer Science, Department of Software Engineering and Information System and the Department of Communication Technology and Networks.
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology comprises four main departments:
Multimedia Department
Software Engineering and Information System Department
Computer Science Department
Communication Technology and Network Department
Faculty of Biotechnology & Biomolecular Sciences
The Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences (BioTech UPM) was established on 1 August 2004 with the merger of two departments, the Department of Biotechnology (from the Faculty of Food Science and Biotechnology) and the Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology (from the Faculty of Science and Environmental Studies). With the formation of BioTech UPM, all activities involving biotechnology in UPM are organised under one administration.
Faculty of Biotechnology & Biomolecular Sciences comprises four main departments:
Department of Bioprocess Technology
Department of Cell & Molecular Biology
Department of Biochemistry
Department of Microbiology
Faculty of Environmental Studies
The Faculty of Environmental Studies, Universiti Putra Malaysia, is established on 1 September 2004. The Faculty developed from the Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science and Environmental Studies. The Department of Environmental Sciences at UPM was established in August 1976 under the Faculty of Science. With the entry of the new Department the Faculty of Science was renamed the Faculty of Science and Environmental Studies. In the same year the Bachelor of Environment programme was introduced. This degree is as a professional degree by the Malaysian Public Services Department. It was the first environment programme in Southeast Asia.
The Faculty of Environmental Studies, Universiti Putra Malaysia, is the only academic body offering degrees in environmental science and management in Malaysia at the Bachelor, Masters and Doctoral levels. There are two Bachelor programmes, two Masters programme and one Doctoral programme offered. More information on these programmes may be found on the Academic Programmes pages.
The academic staff has a wide range of interests. Projects are carried out with members of other departments inside and outside the University. For example, there is long term co-operation with the Department of Environment, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Housing, and Local Government, Local Authorities, and with international agencies such as the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS).
Faculty of Environmental Studies comprises two main departments:
Department of Environmental Management
Department of Environmental Sciences
Faculty of Agriculture & Food Sciences (UPMKB)
Universiti Putra Malaysia Bintulu Sarawak Campus (UPMKB) is not a new name amongst the nation's institutions of higher learning. In fact, it is the oldest campus in Sarawak. The history of Universiti Putra Malaysia Bintulu Sarawak Campus can be traced back to 10 August 1974, when it was a temporary campus under the National Resources Training Centre in Semenggok, Kuching.
The campus was relocated to its permanent site in Bintulu, Sarawak in June 1987. On 27 August 1987, Universiti Pertanian Malaysia Sarawak was officially established as a branch campus through the under 3 centres of learning - Applied Sciences, Basic Sciences and Social Sciences and Management.
Three Diploma level programs were on offer; the Diploma in Agriculture, Diploma in Forestry and Diploma in Agribusiness programs, as well as an initiation program.
UPM was closed temporarily in 1992 and was operational again in November 2001, based on UPM 2001-2010 third strategic plan which was to upgrade UPM into and international center for agriculture, bioresource studies and services. UPMKB’s main focus is in agribio fields such as agriculture, forestry, fishery, livestock, food and environment.
UPMKB is situated just 13 km from the town of Bintulu. It is 715.16 hectares, and surrounded by lush green forest rich in many different types of flora and fauna. Its modern facilities can house up to 2,200 students.
UPMKB is a branch campus of UPM with one faculty, the Faculty of Agriculture and Food Sciences. This faculty comprises five academic departments: Department of Crop Science, Department of Forestry Science, Department of Social Science, Department of Basic Science and Engineering, and Department of Animal Science and Fishery. The faculty offers various Diploma, Bachelor, Master with thesis and PhD programmes.
Faculty of Agriculture & Food Sciences (UPMKB) comprises five main departments:
Department of Crop Science
Department of Forestry Science
Department of Basic Science and Engineering
Department of Social Science
Department of Animal Science and Fishery


== Institutes ==
Institute of Bioscience
The Institute of Bioscience (IBS), Universiti Putra Malaysia was established on 1 August 1996 and was the first research institute founded in UPM. IBS was established to boost Research and Development (R&D) and postgraduate training in various fields of biological sciences. The emphasis on research was given to strengthen the scientific and technological capabilities of the country as well as to develop relevant human capital to support the Industrial and Agricultural Master Plan. Since its inception, IBS’ areas of research have grown and it is gradually developing into a leading research centre in UPM.
Over the past 17 years, the Institute of Bioscience has rearranged and developed the existing units into 5 laboratories to ensure the smoothness and effectiveness of administration as well as resource and facilities management. Each laboratory has 2 main functions, i.e. doing researches and provides the Service and Facility Unit. These 5 laboratories are
Laboratory of Natural Products
Laboratory of Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics
Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine
Laboratory of Biotechnology Marine
Laboratory of Cancer Research UPM-MAKNA
Institute of Advanced Technology
Institute of Advanced Technology (ITMA), Universiti Putra Malaysia was established in 1999 as an interdisciplinary advanced research institute. In line with university’s research restructuring in 2012, ITMA has reformed its niche area to Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology focusing on areas such as materials synthesis and characterisation, materials processing and technology, and materials applications in sensors and functional devices. ITMA develops world-class research laboratories, attracts renowned researchers and trains future research leaders in niche areas related to advanced materials and nanotechnology. ITMA shares its research findings, expertise and facilities with research communities and industries throughout the world.There are four laboratories under ITMA:
Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology
Green Engineering and Sustainable Technology
Sensor Technology
Spatial and Numerical Modelling
Institute for Mathematical Research
The Institute for Mathematical Research (INSPEM) is a research institute specialising in research in mathematics and other areas whose major components are areas in mathematics.
The institute is established to fill the need for such a research centre in the country. It began operating on 1 April 2002 after its establishment was approved by the Division of Higher Education in November 2001. The institute is under the administration of UPM and is subjected to the regulations and stipulated in the statute on the establishment of institutes in UPM.
The main activities of INSPEM include planning, identifying and implementing research in Theoretical Studies, Applied and Computational Statistics, areas of Computational Sciences and Informatics and Innovational Methods in Education. The institute also serves as two-way channel between it and the public and private agencies through which research products can be channelled and problem requiring mathematical treatment can be received and examined at the institute.
At the same time it provides opportunities for collaborative research with agencies from inside and outside UPM. It is also a primary function of INSPEM to invite potential young researchers to carry out research that leads to postgraduate degrees.
The main objectives of INSPEM are:
To carry out research in all identified areas. To established critical-masses of researchers in high-end areas of mathematics. To acquire state-of-the art research facilities. To be a reference centre in matters pertaining to mathematics. To publicise information on research products of INSPEM to public and private sectors. To establish networking with researchers and research institutions from inside and outside of UPM.
Four Research Laboratories have been formed, each led by a Head of Laboratory. The Laboratories are
Laboratory of Theoretical Mathematics
Laboratory of Statistics and Applied Mathematics
Laboratory of Mathematical Sciences and Applications
Laboratory of Education and Mathematics Literacy
Halal Product Research Institute
Establishment of Halal Food Institute as a research center is one of halal proactive measures to put UPM UPM as the leading center of excellence in agricultural education in the country. This establishment has submitted proposals to the management of the University in 2003 and was approved at the Management Committee Meeting University 110th on 26 and 31 March 2003. However, the establishment of this institute can not be implemented because of financial problems the university at the time. Therefore, Faculty of Food Science and Technology has taken the initiative to establish the Halal Food Unit in June 2003.
In August 2004, the Halal Food Unit in collaboration with Yayasan Dakwah Islamiah Malaysia ( YADIM ) has organised a " Workshop on Global Halal Hub Development Malaysia " in conjunction with the 1st Malaysian International Halal Showcase ( Mihas ) 2004. Resolution of the workshop entitled " Proposed Development of Halal Food Hub Global Malaysia "was presented to the Honorable Prime Minister of Malaysia by Y.Bhg. Vice-Chancellor of the university in the opening MIHAS 2004 on 16 August 2004. Following this development, the Ministry of Higher Education has approved and agreed that UPM lead the national agricultural education center on 30 August 2004. To support this initiative, UPM has proposed the establishment of Halal Food Institute and has received approval from the Ministry of Higher Education on 1 June 2005. this initiative was implemented to help Malaysia to realise the aspiration to emerge as a global hub for halal food.
Following the change in administration policy UPM, several workshops were held to address the future direction related issues RMK9 and strengthen the position of UPM as a research university. To enhance research excellence, UPM has held workshops directions from 25–27 May 2006 and has established eight universities and research focus areas Halal products have been placed as one of the focus areas.
Thus, on 1 July 2006, after UPM implement changes Basically, the name Halal Food Institute ( IMH ) was converted to Halal Products Research Institute ( IPPH ). This amendment is to broaden the scope of research IPPH beyond the scope of food and put some new research scope of consumables Muslims and Islamic business. Establishment of Halal Products Research Institute is acting as a one-stop center or ' one- stop center through a comprehensive approach, balanced and ' multifaceted ' to review all aspects of halal products on a national and global level.
IPPH aims to become a center of research excellence halal products, in addition to providing professional services for the realisation of the state in promoting agriculture and make Malaysia as a Global Halal Hub.
Institute of Tropical Forestry and Forest Products (INTROP)
The Institute of Tropical Forestry and Forest Products (INTROP) was established on 1 October 2006 by merging the Institute of Biocomposite and the Rain Forest Academy. It was a very timely merger and it consolidated UPM's expertise and resources to provide solutions to current issues such as the dwindling supply of natural resources and the optimisation of bioresources. INTROP's activities focus on forest canopy management, bioresources valuation and sustainability, sustainable utilisation of biocomposite products, product development and innovation and also market exploration and competitiveness. INTROP is also actively fostering smart partnership, capacity building and human development and is also developing local and international collaborations to further enhance its research capacity and resources. To date, INTROP has been recognised by the authorities as the leader in wood/fibre resources, development of biocomposites, product standard and commercialisation.
Institute of Gerontology
The Institute of Gerontology (IG), UPM was established on 1 April 2002 with the vision and mission to become a world class center of excellence for gerontology and geriatrics through research, training and professional services. Professor Dr. Tengku Aizan Hamid is the founding Director of the Institute of Gerontology and is assisted by a Deputy Director and two (2) Head of Laboratories. The Institute aims to improve the wellbeing of older Malaysians through a multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral approach in research, education and training, clinical and outreach services, community involvement and advocacy as well as networking with international centres in gerontology and geriatrics. Over the years, the Institute has carried out research in numerous areas of old age and ageing with funding from federal and state agencies, government ministries (e.g. MWFCD, MOE, MOSTI) and departments, as well as international bodies such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
Institute of Agricultural & Food Policy Studies
Universiti Putra Malaysia is an institution that has always been proactive in contributing ideas in the field of agriculture to both the government and community at large. Among these contributions include policy suggestions that are founded on the results of research and development conducted at UPM.
UPM established the Pusat Kajian Dasar Pertanian, PKDP or Agricultural Policy Research Centre in 1984. The centre provided a platform for researchers from various disciplines and stakeholders to conduct research and training in agricultural and development policies. PKDP was also involved in national and international seminars, conferences and workshops.
In 2005, Institut Kajian Dasar Pertanian dan Makanan (IKDPM), or Agricultural and Food Policy Studies Institute (AFPSI) was established in response to the increased government emphasis on agriculture in the Malaysian economy.
Institute for Social Science Studies
Institute for Social Science Studies (IPSAS) was established as a center of excellence for research and development (R & D) in the field of social sciences. It examines and analyses current social questions and provides answers and solutions to these issues. Along with this focus study focuses on youth development issues of the country.
The journey from its early formation as an Institute Community and Peace Studies (PEKKA) in 2001 to its current name of Institute for Social Science Studies. A transition of change in the research focus towards Youth Development and efforts into making the institute as a regional centre of reference in this field.
Institute of Tropical Agriculture
The Institute of Tropical Agriculture (ITA) was established on 1 January 2007 through merging of various institutes including the Institute of Plantation Studies. The establishment of this institute was the outcome of the restructuring and rationalisation process of institutes, academy, and centres in Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM). This rationalisation process was implemented as a proactive and integrated effort taken to strengthen UPM status as a Research University (RU) and to become the center of excellence in agriculture education in Malaysia.
In line with UPM mission to have an efficient and effective administration structure via the lean and mean concept, the University has identified six new research clusters: Agriculture, Food, Forestry and Environment, Health, Social Science and Science, and Engineering and Technology to enhance research activities in UPM. In addition, UPM has identified eight specific research thrusts for each cluster, in line with the government's emphasis on the country's agriculture development agenda.
Three of the eight identified thrusts, namely, Food Crops, Plantation Crops and Animal Production will be ITA's research focus.


== School ==
School Of Graduate Studies
The School of Graduate Studies (SGS) is a service and administrative centre established to assist postgraduate students in the processes involved from their registration at UPM up to the completion of their studies. SGS is the core support system which helps ease and enhance the postgraduate experience for UPM students, and plays a crucial role in fostering the relationship between UPM and its graduates.
Initially set up as a Graduate Study Unit in 1978, SGS then proceeded to become a fully functioning Graduate School Office (GSO) in February 1993, to serve the growing population of postgraduate students at UPM. In March 2002, it continued to flourish as it was officially renamed the School of Graduate Studies (SGS) and was established as a service centre which had a status equivalent to a faculty at the university. This entailed its bigger role in the co-ordination of all postgraduate programmes and activities at UPM.
In its original inception, its key role also included an active involvement in research and development in postgraduate studies. In other words, SGS was conceptualised not only as a service centre to facilitate the general running of matters related to postgraduate students, but it was deemed to play a more active and crucial role in bolstering UPM’s status as a research university.
Among its main roles as stated in the 1992 proposal for its establishment are:
To cultivate and nurture a research culture through efficient and effective management of postgraduate research activities
To help the university produce graduates who are knowledgeable and skilled to meet the nation’s needs
To improve the quality of postgraduate programmes and therefore reduce the need for overseas postgraduate training
To increase the international student population and contribute to UPM’s internationalisation through the intensification of publication and research training for staff.
Putra Business School
Putra Business School – formerly the Graduate School of Management, located in Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang.
PUTRA became the first business programme in Malaysia to receive accreditation by AACSB – The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business. Other business programmes accredited by AACSB include Harvard, London Business School, Wharton, the University of Warwick and Yale. Only five percent of all business programmes in the world enjoy AACSB accreditation.
PUTRA has been set up by a not-for-profit foundation, YAYASAN PUTRA BUSINESS SCHOOL – as a private entity with public interest.


== Centre ==
Centre For Diagnostic Nuclear Imaging
This small unit started as part of the Department of Imaging, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Universiti Putra Malaysia in 2003. Subsequently the unit was restructured and repositioned as part of the Dean Office and known as Nuclear Imaging Unit.
In view of increasing need for man power and human capital development as part of the government initiative in improving diagnostic nuclear imaging services for the people, the unit took the initiative in starting the development project. Nuclear Imaging was then announced as a niche area along with the tagline of Research mission of the faculty and university.
In the year 2008, under the 9th Malaysian Plan, the Centre for Diagnostic Nuclear Imaging Project obtained its approval from the Malaysian Ministry Of Higher Education. The project started in the following year and took 11 months to complete and commissioned. On 1 April 2010, the centre started its operation and became the first PET CT equipment installed under the Ministry Of Higher Education for teaching, learning and research development by providing service to the public.
In retrospect, during early phase of development, the unit contributed in various teaching activities in diagnostic imaging programs in other institutions leading to good academic and research networking. The research activities from the unit were partly supported by International partners through financial and non-financial assistance including Ospedale Niguarda, Milan, Italy, Oncology Research Foundation, Italy and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Austria. The unit also initiated research collaborations with other local institutions and hospitals.
Today, the unit is ready to provide clinical services in PET / CT by expanding from oncology and introducing new clinical areas of PET / CT in infection, inflammation, cardiology and neurology. References have been received from public and private hospitals including university hospitals. In support of the government’s aspiration and in line with the Strategic Plan of Malaysian Ministry Of Higher Education, the centre will spearhead the research and academic development in clinical integrated diagnostic imaging specialisation. From 1 October 2010, the unit is officially known as Centre For Diagnostic Nuclear Imaging (PPDN).
Research Management Centre
The Research Management Centre (RMC) was officially established in May 2000 to replace the former University Research Unit that was formed in 1992, to mobilise research management and enhance the overall impact of research to expand alliances and reinforce partnerships with other world class research universities.
Cancer Resource & Education Center
In year 2002, two cancer survivors, one from Malaysia and the other from USA, initiated the idea of adapting and translating selected educational materials into Malay language as one of the ways in providing the much needed information on breast cancer treatment in Malaysia.
Their effort evolved into major educational activity; Cancer Education and Research Project (CaEd). Leadership for this program is being provided cooperatively by Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) and Cornell University. CaEd formally commenced its operation in Malaysia in September 2003.
In 2008, a center called Cancer Resource & Education Center (CaRE) was set up to house the activities of cancer education, information and support programs.
This center was officially launched on 8 July 2009 by YB Senator Dato’ Sri Shahrizat Abdul Jalil, Minister of Women, Family and Community Development.
In August 2011, CaRE was institutionalised under UPM as a Center of Excellence.
University Community Transformation Centre
UPM has been highly involved in community engagement long before the concept of UCTC was perceived. Its involvement dates back to early 70s.
In the 90s, Professional Advancement Centre (PACE), Agro-Entrepreneur Development Centre (AgroPAC) and Agricultural Extension Institute (IPP) were setups. On January 2007, these 3 entities were rejuvenated as Centre for Extension, Entrepreneurship and Professional Advancement (APEEC).
As the role of APEEC met approval of criteria for establishment of UCTC by NBOS, APEEC was renamed as University Community Transformation Centre (UCTC) UPM and its role realigned. This renaming effectively retained previous organisation albeit with some roles and directions adjustments commensurate with its new function as a more pivotal link to communities.
The rebranding was formally approved by Universiti Putra Malaysia’s Senate 575th meeting and came in effect on 14 Mac 2013. Hence, UPM had a leap start a far as UCTC UPM was concerned.


== Campus Life ==
Accommodation Facilities
College list :
Mohamad Rashid College
Second College
Tun Dr. Ismail College
Chancellor College
Fifth College
Sixth College
Sultan Alaeddin Suleiman Shah College
Tun Perak College
Pendeta Za'ba College
Tenth College
Eleventh College
Twelfth College
Thirteenth College
Fourteenth College
Fifteenth College
Sixteenth College
Seventeenth College
Associations & Clubs
Martial Arts / Self-Defense Category
Sports And Recreational Category
Leadership Category
Entrepreneurship Category
Spiritual Category
Cultural Category
Welfare Category
Faculty Category
1Malaysia Category
Students who are interested to join any associations and clubs may proceed to register during the Associations Bazaar in conjunction with Perkasa Putra Week or during the registration of new club members every semester.
Food & Beverages
Arts & Culture
Below is a list of arts and culture clubs that come under the management of PKKSSAAS :
Caklempong Uniputra
Uniputra 5 Harmony
Putra Band
Pelayang Uniputra
Tropikana Uniputra Band
Traditional Poetry
Kreatif Putra Band
Uniputra Kencana Dance
Gamelan Seni Alun Uniputra
Hadrah Uniputra
Uniputra Theater
Ghazal Uniputra
Dikir Barat Uniputra
Kompang Uniputra
Uniputra Choir
Marhaban Uniputra
Tetuang Uniputra
Uniputra Arts of Batik
Uniputra Audio Visual Arts
Nasyid Putra
International Arts and Culture
Sports
The University has an extensive sporting facility. These facilities include a gym, sports hall, outdoor swimming pool, under soil drainage football pitch, Astroturf pitch for hockey, tennis courts, and a floodlit athletics and football stadium. UPM boasts some of the grass pitches in the country including a 18-hole golf course.
In addition, the University is situated nearby the National Sports Council at Bukit Jalil.
UPM provides a range of sports facilities for the university’s staff and students at university and national levels.
UPM features a swimming pool located in the Swimming Complex and tennis courts in the Tennis Complex.
Recreation It offers leisure and recreational facilities for students to carry out activities including fishing, boating, sport, camping, fairs and carnivals as well as a chance to sight the occasional fox.
There is also horseback riding along a comfortable but challenging track at the Equestrian Park.
Recreation location:
Expo Hill
Ayer Hitam Forest Reserve
Golf Course
Driving Range
Equestrian


== Services ==
Putra Science Park (Centre For Innovation Management)
Putra Science Park (PSP) is involved with technology transfer activities in Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), moving potential technologies and inventions from the laboratories to the marketplace. This is where PSP assists in securing and protecting novel innovations through intellectual property processes and identifying applicable commercialisation strategies for the created intellectual property.
PSP also promotes and markets potential technologies through print and electronic media such as periodical publications, exhibitions and roadshows, showcases, press conferences and business matching programs.
In addition to facilitating commercial negotiations and due diligence approach, PSP aims to instil incubator culture to build an entrepreneurial presence for the university.
At the same time, PSP through its Edu-Park Division makes UPM the first university in Malaysia to offer tourism packages to visitors focusing on six(6) spots around the campus.
Putra FM
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) has started offering the Bachelor of Communication program in 1998 with a specialisation in the field of broadcasting four, Journalism, Communications, Corporate Communications and Humanities. To support this academic program, UPM has built a photographic laboratory facility such as laboratories, laboratories and laboratory speech broadcasting. Laboratory broadcasting unit has two units, namely radio and publishing video publishing unit. Radio production unit has now been allocated for upgrading to Campus Radio Station.
Campus Radio Station Universiti Putra Malaysia or known by the name of the Son of FM, a radio station first digital campus university in the country. The design studio and choosing the appropriate equipment for this studio is with the assistance of the Radio Television Malaysia (RTM). UPM campus radio station has been operating under the auspices of the RTM or specifically Selangor FM. Continued co-operation with the RTM is coincident with the MoU was signed.
Putra FM program emphasises adult education by providing major programs of education, information and entertainment. Due to the Putra FM used for academic purposes, the surrounding communities will also receive benefits, especially in terms of exposure science culture, science and technology, including information and communications technology. Continue listening to "Live Sound Campus".


== UPM International Collaborative Programme (UPM ICP) - SGS ==
Jointly Awarded PhD Programme
UPM - University of Sheffield, UK Jointly Awarded Phd Programme
UPM - University of Sheffield, UK Jointly Awarded Phd Programme is a PhD programme which is developed and quality assured by the University of Sheffield and UPM. Upon completion, students will graduate with a jointly awarded PhD certificate from two world-class universities.
UPM-University of Newcastle (Australia) Jointly Awarded PhD Programme
UPM-University of Newcastle (Australia) Jointly Awarded PhD Programme is a jointly awarded PhD degree in areas offered by both universities such as Education, Engineering, Computer Science, Information Technology, Health and Medical Sciences, Science, Mathematics, and Psychology. The PhD degree programme is developed and quality assured by both UPM and UoN.
The programme enriches the international study and experience of PhD candidates. Students get to work in two countries and have access to the latest research equipments and facilities. Students will also gain from the knowledge and experience of the department and research groups from both UPM and UoN. The JARD PhD programme not only facilitates international experience and networking, it offers a more substantial association and real collaboration in research supervision. It provides PhD students with an unforgettable international experience and personal and professional links at the early start of their career. The cost of gaining an overseas experience through this programme is also much lower compared to what it would cost to enroll on a PhD programme overseas.
Dual PhD Programme
UPM - University of Nottingham,UK Dual PhD Degree Programme
UPM - University of Nottingham, UK Dual PhD Degree Programme is a Dual PhD Degree in areas offered by both universities such as Engineering, Biomedical Sciences, Computer Science, Life Sciences, Economics, Politics, History, Science, Education, and Language. The PhD degree programme is developed and quality assured by both UPM and Nottingham. Upon completion of the DDP, students will be awarded two certificates, one from UPM and one from The University of Nottingham.
The programme enriches the international study and experience of PhD candidates. Students get to work in two universities and have access to the latest research equipment and facilities. Students will also gain from the knowledge and experience of the department and research groups from both UPM and Nottingham. The Dual PhD Degree programme not only facilitates international experience and networking, it offers a more substantial association and real collaboration in research supervision. It provides PhD students with an unforgettable international experience and personal and professional links at the start of their career. The cost of gaining an overseas experience through this programme is also much lower compared to what it would cost to enroll on a PhD programme overseas. A student registering at one institution must also register at the partner institution and pay tuition fees relevant to the place of study (UK fees while studying in the UK and Malaysia fees while studying in Malaysia).
UPM - University of Southern Queensland, (Australia) Dual PhD
The UPM - University of Southern Queensland (USQ), (Australia) is a Dual PhD Degree in areas offered by both universities such as Agriculture, Engineering, Computer Science, Communication, Environmental Science, and Education. The PhD degree programme is developed and quality assured by both UPM and USQ. Upon completion of the DDP, students will be awarded two certificates, one from UPM and one from USQ.
The programme enriches the international study and experience of PhD candidates. Students get to work in two universities and have access to the latest research equipment and facilities. Students will also gain from the knowledge and experience of the department and research groups from both UPM and USQ. The Dual PhD Degree programme not only facilitates international experience and networking, it offers a more substantial association and real collaboration in research supervision. It provides PhD students with an unforgettable international experience and personal and professional links at the start of their career. The cost of gaining an overseas experience through this programme is also much lower compared to what it would cost to enroll on a PhD programme overseas.
UPM - Kyushu Institute of Technology (Kyutech), Japan Dual Phd Degree Programme
UPM - Kyushu Institute of Technology (Kyutech), Japan Dual Phd Degree Programme is a Dual PhD Degree in research areas within the field of Life Science and Systems Engineering offered by both institutions. The PhD degree programme is developed and quality assured by both UPM and KYUTECH-LSSE. DDP candidates are required to complete a minimum of 12 credits (minimum 6 credits by lectures and seminars and 6 credits by Special Research) at KYUTECH-LSSE, and a minimum of 12 credits by coursework at UPM. Candidates are also required to submit one thesis in English to UPM and KYUTECH-LSSE. The thesis will be evaluated by a Joint Thesis Committee which consists of examiners from both institutions and other members as specified in the rules and regulations of each institution.
The programme enriches the international study and experience of PhD candidates. Students get to work in two countries and have access to the latest research equipment and facilities. Students will also gain from the knowledge and experience of the department and research groups from both UPM and KYUTECH-LSSE. The Dual PhD Degree programme not only facilitates international experience and networking, it offers a more substantial association and real collaboration in research supervision. It provides PhD students with an unforgettable international experience and personal and professional links at the early start of their career.
The cost of gaining an overseas experience through this programme is also much lower compared to what it would cost to enrol on a PhD programme overseas. A PhD student undertaking the Dual PhD Degree is only liable for the standard test fee, entrance fee and tuition fees for a PhD programme at the home institution. The student will also be responsible for all other expenses including facility charge, travel expenses and living expenses.
UPM - Naresuan University (NU), Thailand Dual Phd Degree Programme
The UPM - Naresuan University (NU), Thailand Dual Phd Degree Programme is a collaboration programme between UPM and NU, where upon completion of the DDP, students will be awarded with two certificates, one from UPM and one from NU. Under this programme, students are required to complete part of the programme at UPM and NU. Only one thesis is required for examination and it will be evaluated by a Joint Thesis Committee which consists of examiners from both institutions and other members as specified in the rules and regulations of each institution.
The programme enriches the international study and experience of PhD candidates. Students get to work in two universities and have access to the latest research equipment and facilities. Students will also gain from the knowledge and experience of the department and research groups from both UPM and NU. The Dual PhD Degree programme not only facilitates international experience and networking, it offers a more substantial association and real collaboration in research supervision. It provides PhD students with an unforgettable international experience and personal and professional links at the start of their career.
Dual master's degree Programme
UPM - Ajou Dual Master of Science Programme
UPM - Ajou Dual Master of Science Programme is the Dual Master of Science (in the field of Computer Science). This is a master's degree programme developed and quality assured by both UPM and Ajou. Upon completion of the DDP, students will be awarded two certificates, one from UPM and one from Ajou University.
The opportunity to work under the guidance of academics from both institutions is one that enhances and enriches the postgraduate experience. Students will especially gain from Ajou’s academic and research culture, and top-notch facilities. The cost of gaining an overseas experience through this programme is also much lower compared to what it would cost to enrol on a typical Master’s programme overseas.
UPM-University of Glasgow (Scotland, UK) Double Postgraduate master's degree Programme
The Double Postgraduate master's degree Programme with University of Glasgow (UoG) is a collaboration programme between UPM and UoG, where upon completion of the programme, students will be awarded with two certificates, one from UPM and one from UoG.
The programme consists of three course components:
Taught Programme (60 credits of taught material covered in Semesters 1 and 2 at UoG)
Research Project 1 (60 credits spanning Semester 1 and 2 at UoG)
Research project 2 (60 credits in Semester 3 at UPM)
UPM - Naresuan University (NU), Thailand Dual Master Of Science Programme
The Dual Master of Science (DMSc) with Naresuan University (NU) is a collaboration programme between UPM and NU, where upon completion of the DMSc, students will be awarded with two certificates, one from UPM and one from NU. Under this programme, students are required to complete part of the programme at UPM and NU. Only one thesis is required for examination and it will be evaluated by a Joint Thesis Committee which consists of examiners from both institutions and other members as specified in the rules and regulations of each institution.
Masters In Land Resource Management
Master In Land Resource Management (In Collaboration With Cambridge International Land Institute)
The Master Programme in Land Resource Management (MASTER LARM) offered by the Faculty of Agriculture, Universiti Putra Malaysia in collaboration with The Cambridge International Land Institute since May 1997, is part of a conscious effort to fulfill this need. This programme is the only one of its kind in Southeast Asia.
A technical trip to UK and Western Europe (SST 5901: Project ) organised by the Cambridge International Land Institute (CILI) and Department of Land Economy, University of Cambridge and UPM will expose students to a balanced land management in accordance with the current trends of modernisation.


== Melbourne/Malaysia 'Split' PhD Partnership ==
In 2007, the Malaysian Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE) negotiated an eight-year Partnership Agreement on behalf of seven Malaysian Universities and The University of Melbourne. This agreement is similar to agreements previously negotiated by the MOHE with Nottingham University and with Imperial College, London. The University of Melbourne is the only Australian university invited to participate in this initiative.
To achieve these objectives, Split PhD scholarships are being offered by the Malaysian universities to their academic staff to undertake PhD training at the University of Melbourne. These scholarships are in addition to the regular full-time scholarships for overseas study offered by the MOHE through Malaysian public universities. The Split PhD scholarship enables the scholarship recipients to undertake the three year full-time University of Melbourne PhD degree over four years and candidates are expected to split their PhD study equally between The University of Melbourne and their respective Malaysian university.
The following seven Malaysian universities have been selected by the Malaysian Government to be involved in the Split-PhD and research collaboration initiative with the University of Melbourne:
Universiti Malaya (UM)
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM)
International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM)
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS)
Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS)
Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM) 


== University Agriculture Park ==
University Agriculture Park (TPU) was established on 1st. December 2001 to facilitate in the teaching and research in agriculture related fields and also provide services for the students, staffs and the community.
University Agriculture Park was originally established as the Farm Division, Universiti Pertanian Malaysia in 1971 with its function then was to provide students with agriculture practical training and to give services to the campus community.
In 1998, Farm Division was restructured to become University Research Park, Universiti Putra Malaysia to facilitated research and services in agriculture.


== Ayer Hitam UPM Research Forest ==
The research forest is at the Ayer Hitam Reserved Forest, Puchong, with a space of 1,248 hectares. The forest is 20 km from the capital city Kuala Lumpur and 10 km from the main campus of Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) Serdang. The Selangor State Government gave the research forest in a long term agreement for 80 years beginning 1996 for the purpose of education and research. The forest is managed by the Selangor Forestry Department and Faculty of Forestry UPM based on sustainable forest management. The Forest Management Plan for Ayer Hitam Forest Reserve is prepared by the faculty.
The forest area is the only well-managed Lowland Dipterocarp Forest in the Klang Valley. The facilities include a partially enclosed multipurpose hall, prayer room, kitchen, bathrooms, toilets and a playing field. The base camp can accommodate around 100 to 150 person at a time.
The forest is also used for teaching purposes in the field of forestry, wood science, and park and recreation management. There are field plots for research activities in silviculture, wildlife management, forest ecology, forest survey, forest engineering, and hydrology. The extension programmes include forestry, science, motivation, interpretation and ecological camps.


== UPM – Mitsubishi Corporation Forest Restoration Project ==
The Joint Research Project on Rehabilitation of Tropical Rainforest Ecosystem was initiated in July 1991 by Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) and Yokohama National University, Japan (YNU) with sponsorship from Mitsubishi Corporation. The project is based on the success of restoration of native forest land in Japan and results of some field surveys conducted in the forests of South East Asian countries since 1978. The scientific basis of the project is based on the concept of vegetation association by Prof. Akira Miyawaki from Yokohama National University.
The objectives of the project are to assess the health of rehabilitated forest through measuring the indicators of forest health and the sustainability of forest resources. The project conducts research in soil science, plant physiology, water science, biodiversity (terrestrial floral, wildlife, aquatic flora and fauna, insect and microbes) and in microclimatic conditions that indicate the health of the rehabilitated forest.
The project was initiated in UPM Bintulu campus Sarawak (Phase 1) at a 47.5 ha site. In 2010, 350,000 seedlings were planted representing 128 species native to Sarawak. In addition, 100 research plots were established in the rehabilitated area.
In July 2008, a new agreement between UPM and Mitsubishi Corporation was signed to establish a model planted forest of indigenous tree species in an urban setting at UPM main campus Serdang, Selangor. The second phase of the project was launched on 26 November 2008 covering an area of 27 hectares. To date 13500 seedlings representing 136 species have been planted.


== Logo ==
The university logo is a shield, with lines and an abstract water droplet within. The colours of the logo are red and grey.


== Tagline ==
Pertanian . Inovasi . Kehidupan ( Agriculture . Innovation . Life)


== Rankings ==


== Notable alumni ==
Tun Datu Haji Mustapha bin Datu Harun – First Governor of the Malaysian State of Sabah
Dato' Seri Dr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi – Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia
Amirudin Shari – Selangor State Executive Councillor


== See also ==
List of forestry universities and colleges


== References ==


== External links ==
Universiti Putra Malaysia