Krishna Prasad is an Indian journalist and Editor-in-Chief of the national news magazine Outlook. He also publishes the popular blog, Churumuri. He is known for having exposed match-fixing in Indian Cricket along with Aniruddha Bahal.


== Early life ==
He was born on 12 October 1968 in Mysore and attended the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) school. He started out in journalism as a stringer for the New Indian Express under the editorship of T. J. S. George while he was still studying electronics in college.


== Career ==
He has worked for the Sunday Observer (now defunct) and the Times of India in Mumbai. He joined Outlook as a reporter and later became the magazine's special issues editor. From August 2006 to June 2007, he edited the English-language daily Vijay Times (which was converted into the Bangalore Mirror). Since October 2008 he has edited Outlook published from New Delhi. Thomas L. Friedman described Prasad as "one of the brightest young journalists I met in India" during a 2004 visit from the United States.
Krishna Prasad has taught journalism at various colleges and universities in India and the United States for many years. From August to October 2007, he traveled in the United States, lecturing on Indian media at Central Michigan University, Ball State University, University of Wisconsin-River Falls, and Penn State University. He has also lectured at the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore; the National Defence College, New Delhi; and the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration.


== Blogs ==
Krishna Prasad started publishing Churumuri in March 2006, after having drawn inspiration from Captain G. R. Gopinath. Through a campaign on Churumuri, Prasad was one among those who successfully persuaded public officials into christening the Mysore-Yeshwanthpur Express as the 'Malgudi Express' in honour of writer, R. K. Narayan. He recently instituted the T S Satyan Memorial Awards for Photojournalism in association with Karnataka Photo News, a regional photo news agency.
He also operates the media blog "sans serif", and a food blog focused on southern Indian vegetarian cuisines.


== References ==