This is a list of characters who appear in the series Static Shock.


== Hawkins FamilyEdit ==


=== StaticEdit ===
Virgil Ovid Hawkins/Static (Phil LaMarr) He is an African-American high school student in Dakota City. As a result of accidental exposure to an experimental mutagen in an event known as the Big Bang, he gained the ability to control and manipulate electromagnetism, and uses these powers to become a superhero named "Static." Countless others who were also exposed gained a wide variety of mutations and abilities, and Static spends much of his time dealing with these "Bang Babies", many of whom use their abilities in selfish, harmful, and even criminal ways.
Virgil is named after the first African-American to go to law school (who was himself named for the Roman poets Virgil and Ovid).


=== Robert HawkinsEdit ===
Robert Hawkins (Kevin Michael Richardson) – A social worker who runs the Freeman Community Center as head counselor, he is a widower and the single father of two teenagers. Robert is a caring, understanding, but strict parent. He dislikes gangs and the destructive attitudes of most Bang Babies, and his work at the community center is motivated by a desire to counteract their bad influence on young people.
In the episode "Static Shaq", it is mentioned that Robert has also been in the Marines and a camp counselor. In the episode "Blast from the Past", Robert states that when he was a kid, he was (and still is) a fan of the superhero Soul Power. In the episode "Linked", it is revealed that Robert played football in college, and he was nicknamed "Streak." At first, Robert disliked Static, believing that Static would one day go bad; his open opinion about Static in the episode "Aftershock" left Virgil worried that the Big Bang might have aftereffects. Robert remained unaware of his son's secret identity through most of the series, although part of him had suspicions about Virgil's behavior. In the episode "Kidnapped", Robert acknowledged the truth that had been right under his nose: his son, Virgil, was Static. In the end, Robert keeps his son's superhero identity along with Gear's secret, even from his daughter.


=== Sharon HawkinsEdit ===
Sharon Hawkins (Michele Morgan) – Virgil's strong-willed, annoying, but caring, older sister. Sharon attends college, but still lives at home. She also volunteers at a hospital, and counsels young people at the Freeman Community Center, like her father. Sharon has always been a big fan of Static. Although deep down, she and her younger brother do love each other in a brother-sister way, but they frequently argue, challenge, and tease each other, mainly about things such as the household chores, his studying, and her cooking (which is usually barely edible).
Sharon has been dating Adam Evans a.k.a. The Rubber-Band Man since the episode "Bent Out of Shape"; though she knows about his super identity, she genuinely cares for him. In the episode "Brother-Sister Act," Sharon notices how similar Static and Virgil are, and tries to pin him down with proof of her suspicions, but is later tricked into thinking that her suspicions were wrong. In the episode "Out of Africa", she was the recipient of a golden spider amulet, which temporarily granted her the power/ability to create illusions; however when she returned the amulet to Anansi, the abilities vanished. At the end of the fourth season, Sharon continues to be in the dark about her brother's superhero secret, though in the final episode "Power Outage", she becomes suspicious once again of Virgil's behavior until their father interrupts them.


=== Jean HawkinsEdit ===
Jean Hawkins (Alfre Woodard) - She is late wife of Robert Hawkins, and mother of Sharon and Virgil. Jean is frequently mentioned throughout the series. In "Shock to the System", (the first episode of season 1), it was mentioned that she had died from gangfire; in "Flashback", in season 3, Jean Hawkins was shown to have been an "Emergency Rescue Doctor", (a paramedic), and that specifically she had been fatally wounded by a stray gunshot during the Dakota Riots, which happened exactly five years prior to the events of the episodes of "Flashback". Her death is at the root of Virgil's intense dislike of guns. She was very important to all of her family, especially to Virgil, who was only 10 years old when she died; in "Tantrum", in season 1, Hawkins family movies show that she really knew what made Virgil tick even when he was a baby; it is also shown that Virgil visits his mother's grave and talks to her when he's troubled.
Jean makes her only physical appearance in the events of "Flashback", when Static, Gear, Time-Zone and Ebon were all transported back in time by Time-Zone's powers to the night of the Dakota Riots. Although Static attempted to convince her to stay in a safe place, (even revealing that he was her son Virgil from the future), she still left to go on duty as a paramedic, and was shot and killed that night by a stray bullet by gangfire, but not before telling Virgil how proud she was of him having become a superhero—a statement which finally comforted Virgil over her untimely death.


=== Trina JessupEdit ===
Trina Jessup (Sheryl Lee Ralph) - Robert's new romantic love interest, sweetheart, and girlfriend. Trina is a police officer at Dakota Police Department. She is like a second mother to Virgil and Sharon, even if the former has no initial affinity towards her. She never discovers that Virgil is Static, but indirectly she helps him and Gear solve the crimes around Dakota.


== Other heroesEdit ==


=== GearEdit ===
Gear, real name Richard "Richie" Osgood Foley, is an ally of lead character Static, and Virgil Hawkins best friend. The two go far back. He was voiced by Jason Marsden. He was not present for the Big Bang, but Static's clothes still carried some of the gas, and his powers were dormant until Season Three. His power is superhuman intelligence, having invented a number of weapons and devices for Static and himself to use. His superhuman intelligence allows for a very limited form of technopathy with his visor and Back-Pack, as seen in episode 52 when Richie was no longer able to interpret the data stream in his visor and his backpack was no longer able to sync with his brain, which was at genius level when Back-Pack was programmed.
According to series creators, Richie's character was based on Rick Stone, Virgil's best friend in the comics, who is gay. However, since his sexual orientation could not be explored within the context of a children's television series, it was not addressed.


=== Rubberband ManEdit ===
Adam Evans/Rubber-Band Man (voiced by Kadeem Hardison) – Adam Evans is a meta-human whose body structure consists of living rubber, which he can shape into a wide variety of forms, even to the point of altering his physical appearance into that of another person. Since Rubber-Band Man and his brother Ebon can both stretch themselves; it is possible that the effects of the gas may have something to do with the person's genetic code. The name "Adam Evans" is derived from the names of former Milestone writers Adam Blaustein and Yves Fezzani, who created the character. The alias "Stringer" Rubber-Band Man uses in one episode is his real last name of his comic version, first used in Static #34.
Adam is also a talented musician who is on the verge of a professional career. His greatest personal weakness is a reading disorder which he has to struggle through. He is the younger brother of Static's archenemy, Ebon. Prior to the Big Bang, Adam was part of his brother's gang before he took a stock-clerk job at a music store called Stonegas Records. Rubber-Band Man first appears as a tragic villain when he goes after an opportunistic record producer who had stolen one of his songs. He would subsequently breaks out of prison but deciding not to pursue a criminal career, uses his powers to take up a new identity, "Stringer", and becomes a musical rising star. He also started dating Virgil's sister Sharon, and although he initially clashes with Static, he does not carry on his grudge against him after meeting Sharon and even reforms and becomes one of his allies in crime-fighting. While on patrol, Rubber-Band Man typically acts as an older brother figure to Static, keeping him from showing off and reminding him of consequences in their work, something that Adam's real brother Ebon never actually did when he looked after Adam prior to the Big Bang. It is unknown if Adam Evans was exposed to the cure for the Big Bang that neutralized many of the Bang Babies in Dakota at the end of the series.


=== She-BangEdit ===
She-Bang, whose real name is Shanice Vale, is a girl with superhuman strength, stamina, agility, reflexes, and endurance. Although she seems like a meta-human she actually was not exposed to the gas; she is really a science project made by her parents, Jonathon and Dolores, who made her chromosome by chromosome. They fell in love with her and went into hiding from a group of people who want to clone her, so she had to act like a shy, normal person till she moved to Dakota trying to blend in with the other Bang-Babies. When all the people who were after her were captured, she and her parents moved back to Dakota. She has not been seen since.


=== Time-ZoneEdit ===
Nina Crocker/Time-Zone (Rachael MacFarlane) – A Bang Baby with the ability to warp time, allowing her to travel into the past; during her time with her abilities, she was one of the strongest and most powerful metahumans on the planet. While looking for Static and Gear, she bumped into Ebon. He wanted to use her powers to avoid the cops. After being saved from Ebon, Gear ran tests on her and found out that she had no control over her powers. Since she wanted to become a hero, Gear made a remote that was linked to a belt around her costume. The remote helped her control her powers. Now named as the superhero Time-Zone, Nina became the third member of the Shock Pack, but her time as a member was brief: Due to an encounter with Ebon, Nina decided that her powers were too dangerous to keep, and went back in time to stop her past self from being present at the night of the Big Bang (by stealing her own bike, according to Richie.) Nina is now a happy, ordinary girl, and has no memory of her life in the original timeline as Time-Zone. Time-Zone's powers were based on Flashback's from Blood Syndicate.


=== Anansi the SpiderEdit ===
Anansi the Spider (voiced by Carl Lumbly) – A superhero native to Ghana, and the greatest hero in West Africa. Named after the trickster spider of African folklore, Anansi has the power to create visible, realistic illusions. In his own words he explains it as: "people only see what I want them to see." He also has the ability to cling to surfaces, standing upside-down, and walking on vertical surfaces. In both his appearances, references to Marvel Comics' Spider-Man are subtly made, to which he good naturedly replies, "I get that a lot." And when Virgil told him to hit a villain with a "web blast," he replies, "I'm not that kind of spider." He also seems to inspire Virgil (Static) about what it truly means to be a superhero. In the episode "Out of Africa," Anansi travels to Dakota to stop Osebo, Mmboro, and Onini (three of his enemies, based on the animals that the legendary Anansi caught to attain his stories,) from obtaining an ancient, golden spider talisman, which is revealed to be the source of Anansi's powers. Static and Gear get drawn in when Sharon is kidnapped. In the end, Anansi reclaims the artifact, but not before Sharon used it to make all of the dirty dishes "disappear," and took it for a spin for a while, and got kidnapped. Static, Gear, and Anansi rescued her. The spider artifact was never seen again afterward, as Anansi made sure to hide it.
Anansi's enemies are based on an ancient legend; the story, as told by Anansi, was that a clever Spider wanted to be able to tell stories, and the "Sky Spirit" king of all the lands agreed to give the spider what he wanted if he captured three troublemakers: Onini the Python, Osebo the Leopard, and the Mmoboro Hornet. The Spider trapped Mmoboro in a gourd, tied Onini to a stick, and dug a pit and covered it with leaves, then lured Osebo into it. The Sky Spirit thanked the spider and granted its wish, giving it the ability to tell stories through the power of making illusions. Anansi has three enemies: Mmoboro, a giant talking wasp who can turn into a swarm of smaller wasps, Onini, a giant talking black python, and Osebo, a large man-shaped talking leopard with a metal fist. At first sight, everyone mistakes Osebo for a tiger as he has stripes instead of spots; everyone who has ever heard that his is a leopard wonders why he has stripes. Anansi himself told Static in "Out of Africa," "I too often wonder about the stripes." It is still unknown why Osebo has stripes.


=== Soul PowerEdit ===
Morris Grant/Soul Power (voiced by Brock Peters) – An elderly superhero with powers similar to Static's; he now lives in a retirement home, but back in the 1960s, he protected Dakota from criminals. He gained his powers in an accident at Hoover Dam. He had a Batcave-like headquarters hidden underground in/near Dakota's rapid transit system called the Power Pad, and drove a car called the Soulmobile. Back then, he also had a sidekick, Sparky. He, Sparky, and Static teamed up in order to defeat Soul Power's greatest foe, Professor Menace, who disappeared after a battle with Soul Power in 1963. Soul Power was similar to the DC Comics superhero Black Lightning.


=== SparkyEdit ===
Phillip Rollins/Sparky (voiced by Rodney Saulsberry) – He was Soul Power's sidekick back in the 1970s, but he is now a meteorologist. Rollins took on the guise of Sparky one more time in order to help Static and Soul Power fight Professor Menace. His powers were derived from a suit he originally invented and wore so he could be like his idol, Soul Power, and fight alongside him. He too is like Black Lightning and like Batman's sidekick, Robin.


=== Hoop SquadEdit ===
The Hoop Squad heroes Pulverizer, Spindrive, Centerforce, and Pointman are superheroes who work for a secret government. They all have their powers in their super suits and they have secret identities. When they are not fighting crime, they are famous NBA players Steve Nash, Yao Ming, Karl Malone, and Tracy McGrady.


== Other Bang BabiesEdit ==


=== D-StructEdit ===
Derek "Zee-Bee" Barnett/D-Struct (voiced by Bumper Robinson) – A track athlete whose powers generated and enveloped him in a shroud composed of compressed ionic energy, which could both protect him from harm or be directed at targets, but which also gave him the appearance of monstrous apparition. Derek was captured by Ebon and coerced into joining the Meta-Breed, (feeling he had no other choice), and was given the name "D-Struct." Static was able to persuade Derek to quit the gang and return home to his mother. Afterwards, Derek volunteered himself as a subject for Bang Baby research. He is based on a character who appeared in both the Static and Hardware comics.


=== Dwayne McCallEdit ===
Dwayne McCall (voiced by Blayn Barbosa) – is a pre-teenaged boy who possesses reality-manipulating powers after exposure to Big Bang gas, allowing him to change things into anything else he can clearly imagine, (he has to know what they/it looks, smells, or sounds like, etc.). Dwayne is shy, misguided, and doesn't have very many friends, and likes to conjure characters from his favorite comic books, computer games,TV shows and commercials, bringing them to life with his powers. His stepbrother, Aaron Price, finds out about his powers and talks him into getting him free money and other goods from the banks and malls of Dakota. Static eventually discovers what’s going on and tells Dwayne to stop listening to his brother. While Dwayne did not believe what Static was saying (and tried to kill him in rage), Static plays a tape of himself (as Virgil) and Aaron talking. The tape was all that Dwayne needed to hear, as Aaron frequently expressed his dislike of Dwayne in the recording. Dwayne, hurt by Aaron's lies decides to stop using his powers. Virgil's father Robert has worked with Dwayne and found Aaron to be a very bad influence on him, But Virgil knew his father was a better role model for Dwayne. It has been suggested that the character is an homage to Dwayne McDuffie, who co-created the characters out of his imagination, and who (at the time) lived in a different state from the show's producers, and thus communicated with them only by phone.


=== MirageEdit ===
Miranda/Mirage (Gavin Turek) – A young girl with special photokinetic powers, which allowed her to generate visible, realistic illusions by manipulating light into anything she imagined or remembered. Her older brother was Byron (aka Boom), and they lived with their grandmother following their parents' death. Their powers came from stepping in a spill of the chemicals from the Big Bang. Mirage agreed to help Boom steal money to buy a new place for them to live (only because he is her older brother, a brother-sister relationship where he usually bosses her around), but after talking with Static, she sees how having powers has corrupted her elder brother and helps Static stop him. Mirage was then taken in by the Dakota City Department of Social Services, but not before she generated an illusion of Static flying into the distance, as a favor to Static (Static/Virgil needed to convince his sister that he was not Static).


=== PermafrostEdit ===
Maureen Conner/Permafrost (Hynden Walch) – Following her mother's death, Maureen Conner became homeless, and developed psychiatric problems from the sheer rejection and loneliness. After the Big Bang, her hair turned white and her skin light blue, and she became an incredibly strong cryokinetic, able to create manipulate and control frost, sleet, flurries, snow and ice, and create massive blizzards, hailstorms, and snowstorms. Around Christmas, Maureen turned to trouble-making, attracting the attention of Static, who, after learning her tragic past, managed to reach out and calm her down. The girl was taken to a local church for help in their homeless program, which she gratefully accepted.


=== NailsEdit ===
Allie Langford/Nails (Sibhan Fallen) - A teenage girl who experienced a delayed reaction to the Big Bang. Allie's exposure to the Big-Bang has transmuted her literally into a 'Girl of Steel', along with the ability to lengthen and retract the length of her fingernails, as well as shoot them as projectiles and regenerate new fingernails. Allie wore heavy make-up on her face and hands and took to wearing a full-length coat to hide her transformation from everyone, including her parents.
In her attempts to find a cure without drawing attention to her condition, Allie learned of a Bang-Baby Clinic online and ventured to Gotham City. To her dismay, Nails (as Allie took to calling herself) learned that the clinic was in fact a hoax to hire meta-human mercenaries for personal gain orchestrated by Harley Quinn and Poison Ivy, who played on Allie's insecurities and her desire to be returned to normal to persuade her into helping them rob a ship full of gold, in exchange for a cure. Static and Batman foil the scheme, however, and later, after having been reunited with her parents in Dakota, Allie was sponsored for a treatment program at a new Bang-Baby clinic established by Batman's alter-ego Bruce Wayne, where she began to make progress in controlling and reversing her "metallic affliction".


=== DuleEdit ===
Dule Jones (Marshall Jones) – A former gangbanger, he has metal tentacles which grow from his back (similar to Marvel Comics supervillain Doctor Octopus). Unlike fellow gang member Troy/Chainlink, Dule can retract his tentacles, and thus hide the fact that he is a Bang Baby. After the Big Bang, Dule gives up his gang lifestyle to play professional football, but Chainlink tries to blackmail him for money, threatening to reveal his secret. When they confront each other, everyone finds out that his powers are more advanced than Dule's (due to the fact that he breathed in more gas). Then Dule goes public, defusing the threat and defeating Chainlink in a confrontation with help from Static, Gear, and other football players.


== The Night-BreedEdit ==
A group of Bang Babies recruited by Ebon. Its members are Bang Babies who have a fatal sensitivity to light, so they live underground. They are also very distinguishable, due to their vividly yellow-colored predator-type eyes. After Static and Gear thwart Ebon's plan, the Night-Breed refuses the duo's offer to help and retreat back into the darkness, though not without promising to remain their friends. It is assumed that after the events of the series' finale, "Power Outage", they are returned to their normal, non-powered state.
Despite the sole episode in which they appear making reference to more of these Bang Babies (season 4's "Army of Darkness"), these four are the only known members:


=== NightingaleEdit ===
Nightingale/Gail (Colleen O'Shaughnessey) – Generates and controls a special black smoke-like dust called dark matter that she uses to protect herself from intense light and as a cover screen for escapes. Nightingale lives underground along with other light-sensitive Bang Babies and is recruited by Ebon, who names them the Night-Breed, but she turns on Ebon during his attempt to blanket the entire city in pure "dark matter" (giving them free rein of it), absorbing it into herself.


=== BrickhouseEdit ===
Brickhouse (voiced by Dawnn Lewis) – Nightingale's best friend whom the Big Bang granted the ability to morph her body into a living brick-like humanoid state. She turns against Ebon when he traps Static, Gear, and Nightingale, and helps them escape. Brickhouse is based on one of the central characters of Blood Syndicate.


=== TechEdit ===
Tech (voiced by Freddy Rodriguez) – Like Gear, the Big Bang gave him superhuman intelligence. He uses it to build a machine to cover the city in dark matter, and sides with Ebon when Nightingale and Brickhouse rebel and help Static and Gear to thwart it. Afterward, Tech decides to work on a cure for the Night-Breed's light sensitivity.


=== FadeEdit ===
Fade (Freddy Rodriguez) – Fade is physically intangible, i.e. he has the ability to pass through virtually anything. Fade sides with Ebon when Nightingale and Brickhouse rebel against him, and goes back into hiding after their attempted takeover of Dakota is thwarted. He is based on one of the central characters of Blood Syndicate.


== The Meta-BreedEdit ==
The Meta-Breed is a large gangster group of Bang Babies led by Ebon.


=== EbonEdit ===
Real Name: Ivan Evans
Voice Actor: Gary Sturgis
The head of a large group of Bang Babies including Shiv and Talon, Ebon is an unusually powerful and strong umbrakinetic trans-morph; a living shadow and inter-dimensional portal able to hide within, control and manipulate pure darkness and shadows, as well as transport others to various locations of his choice. His weakness is strong sources of light. Ebon's real name is Ivan Evans, and he is Rubberband Man's older brother.
Ebon is always recruiting newer and much stronger members to add to his crew and has come head-to-head with several other Bang Babies over the course of his life. With a rivalry with Static and Gear, Ebon also does not get along too well with Madelyn or Hot-Streak. Ebon had always held a grudge against Static for ruining so many of his plans. Some of his attacks against Static would even become lethal, but Static would still defeat him.
When Dr. Todd's Bang Baby cure was transforming them back into humans, Ebon staged a plan to get the last vial of Bang Baby gas and stage another Big Bang, one that would potentially create hundreds more Bang Babies than the first one. Ebon and Hot-Streak fought over the final vial of gas and, being exposed to an overdose of it, merged into one giant Bang Baby-monster which combined both their powers. With Static and Gear being the only two remaining Bang Babies, they were able to take down Ebon and Hotstreak by blowing up a fuel tank inside their body, but it remains unknown whether the bang baby beast survived this final confrontation.
Ebon's powers as a living shadow and inter-dimensional portal, are a nod to the "Shadowslide", the method of teleportation utilized by the Shadow Cabinet, one of Milestone Media's title series'. They are also similar to Shadow Thief's powers.


=== ShivEdit ===
Real Name: Unknown
Voice Actor: Brian Tochi
Getting his 'nom-de-crime' from a shiv (a kind of bladed weapon), Shiv is the immature jokester of the Meta-Breed; in fact, when he encountered the Joker, he tells the villain "Big fan, big fan...". He has been described as insane by both fans and creators of the show and comics. Shiv may be one of the many Bang Babies whose mental health was affected by the Big Bang, but this is never confirmed; he may simply just be an eccentric, childish jokester. Shiv's abilities enable him to generate pure whitish-pink "light energy", which he could blast at opponents, and fashion into numerous useful tools and weapons which he could hold, throw, or fashion around his arms and hands, giving rise to his new alias; 'Shiv.' Shiv is assumed to have either returned to normal, or is now among the reinfected Dakota's Bang-Baby population at the end of the series.


=== TalonEdit ===
Real Name: Teresa (Last Name Unknown)
Voice Actor: Tia Texada
A teenage girl, Talon is a metahuman whose exposure to the Big Bang transformed her into a humanoid avian bird, a fact which she was really bitter about throughout the series. As a metahuman, Talon had claw-like digits on her hands and talon-like digits on her feet; she was covered in white orange feathers, but retained her red hair color. The most notable attribute of her transformation was a set of feathered patagia extending from her scapula to her forearms which enabled her to fly by flapping her arms. As an offensive aspect bestowed upon her by her exposure to the Big Bang, Talon could emit incredibly strong, large, visible lavender-colored hypersonic shrieks from her mouth and vocal cords; similar to the Marvel Comics superhero Banshee and DC's Black Canary. Her hypersonic sound abilities are completely useless if her mouth is gagged.
Talon was first introduced as a member of the Meta-Breed, making her a frequent opponent of Static. When the cure was introduced, Talon accompanied Ebon, Hot-Streak, and Shiv to steal the last canister of gas. However, before they could escape, Talon was restored to normal, and she wanted to stay that way. Ebon, whose powers were deteriorating, was forced to leave her behind; at the hospital, she abandoned the name of Talon for her real name, and told Static and Gear that Ebon was going to use the gas to set off another Big Bang. That night, Teresa got kidnapped by Ebon, who refused to let her leave his side, and was taken to the docks to be re-exposed. She was saved by Static and Gear, who were captured shortly afterwards. In return, she freed them and escaped the area just before Ebon and Hot-Streak began wreaking havoc as a fused super-enhanced, flame-and-shadow monster.


=== Francis Stone/F-Stop/HotstreakEdit ===

Real Name: Francis Stone, (also known as 'F-Stop')
Voice Actor: Danny Cooksey
Hotstreak (Francis Stone/F-Stop) was one of the gang members at the docks when the Big Bang occurred. After being exposed to the gas, Francis Stone became Hotstreak. His powers added to his hotheadedness by giving him the ability to create and shoot blasts of fire. His powers are loosely based on the Human Torch and Pyro. In the TV show, his bullying seems mainly driven by his crush on Frieda.
Hotstreak was one of Static's very first rivals, giving him a challenge nearly every time they meet. The fights would be seem to be personal in some way since Static, and Hotstreak already had history with each other before The Big Bang as Virgil, and Francis. He seemed to mellow out as the series went on, and with enough time he might have reformed into a good guy. There was evidence of this in the episode "No Man's Island" when he skipped a chance to escape the island to go save the others. He stopped the troops attacking Static, Gear, Rubberband Man, and Talon by taking Alva hostage. He was also seemingly touched by Static's effort to risk his life to save Alva's son, to the point where he joined Static in the effort to save Edwin. Unfortunately, when Dr. Todd’s Bang Baby cure was turning the Bang Babies back into humans, Ebon staged a plan to get the last vial of Bang Baby gas and stage another "Big Bang", one that would potentially create more Bang Babies than the first one. Ebon and Hotstreak fought over the final vial of gas and, being exposed to an overdose of it, merged into one giant Bang Baby-monster which combined both their powers. With Static and Gear being the only two remaining Bang Babies, they were able to take down Ebon and Hotstreak by blowing up a fuel tank inside their body, but it remains unknown whether the monster survived this final confrontation.


=== AquamariaEdit ===
Real Name: Maria (Last Name Unknown)
Voice Actor: Erika Velez (Bad Stretch); Yeni Álvarez (Wet and Wild)
Aquamaria (real name unknown) is a girl, who was transformed into a transmorph, in her case a being of living liquid water, by the Big Bang. Unlike other Bang Babies with transmorphic abilities like Rubber-Band Man, Aquamaria could not change back and forth from her true human form for Lex (at least she was never seen to have such an ability in either of her appearances during the series run). The only known background information given about Aquamaria is that she has a mother and a younger sister, who she lived with before she was exposed to Big Bang gas, not returning home after becoming a Bang Baby.
As a life-form composed of colloidal water, the Bang-Baby known now as Aquamaria is capable of hydrokinetic abilities, able to manipulate her own form, expanding or compressing her physical mass and 'shapeshifting' parts of her body (like turning her hand and forearm into a net/bag to gather up cash when she and Hot-Streak robbed a music store in Wet and Wild.) In a fight, Aquamaria can aim a pressurized water attack from her arms similar to a geyser, or become one herself. Able to merge with a larger body of water, Aquamaria can overwhelm opponents by becoming a living flood.
In her first appearance, in Bad Stretch (in season 2), Aquamaria, having been recruited by Ebon into the Meta-Breed, was undergoing her initiation by first robbing a stadium with the intention to lure out Static, and then take him down one-on-one. Ebon had been counting on her victory as he had thought that "her water powers would stop him for sure." While Aquamaria had successfully shorted out Static's powers, she was taken on and captured by the Rubber-Band Man. She was then taken into police custody and kept contained by a specialized containment unit that was custom-made just for her. Aquamaria was later broken out of jail, along with other members of the Meta-Breed, by Ebon disguised as Rubber-Band Man to frame him. When Static revealed Ebon's deception and the gang Ebon lead as the Meta-Breed while the Rubber-Band Man fought Ebon alone, he then had to take on Aquamaria, successfully neutralizing her by using his head and electrolysis to break her down from water into hydrogen and oxygen—while she survived this, it left her unconscious.
Aquamaria later teamed up with Hot-Streak, but was frozen by Static and Gear. Later, a team of scientists offered her the chance to be the first to try their antidote for the Big Bang mutagen, and despite an attempt by Hot-Streak to sabotage the treatment, Aquamaria was eventually returned to normal. She was based on a Blood Syndicate character.


=== SlipstreamEdit ===
Real Name: Unknown (only referred to as 'Heavy-C')
Voice Actor: Bumper Robinson
A heavy-set teenage bully (with a voice pattern similar to Fat Albert) who always steals other people's food like the kids at Burger Fool. Slipstream was affected by the Big Bang and given incredible wind powers. After his fight with Static where Static defeated him after having to recharge, he was rarely heard from again, but he was seen in Power Outage among the de-powered Bang Babies who were following an offer from Ebon to have their powers restored.


=== BoomEdit ===
Real Name: Byron (Last Name Unknown)
Voice Actor: Ricky D'Shon Collins
After both of their parents died and they were taken in by their grandmother, Boom and his younger sister, Mirage (Miranda), were exposed to a spill of the Big Bang gas. Boom was able to generate large and unusually strong amounts of hypersonic sound waves from a loudspeaker on his chest, causing massive amounts of damage. Mirage's powers are of illusion-casting. Boom and Mirage steal a lot of money; Boom claims it's for supporting his grandmother. While it is implied that Boom's aggressive personality may have been the result of his exposure to Big-Bang gas (as Mirage reveals to Static that her brother never acted like that before), Mirage keeps her own personality and becomes increasingly disturbed by Boom's actions (as Boom's Quantum Vapour-exposure may have just brought-out a worse side of him he had just never shown before). Mirage finally helps Static trap her brother, and in return, creates an illusion of Static flying away (to mislead Sharon, who was starting to suspect that Virgil and Static were one and the same). Boom was seen in Power Outage as one of the meta-humans wanting to have their powers restored, but he was not exposed to the Big Bang Gas; both Boom and his sister are presumed to have been returned to normal. He resembles Siryn from the X-Factor.


=== CarmendilloEdit ===
Real Name: Unknown, (also known as 'Carmen')
Voice Actor: Matt Ballard (seasons 1 & 2) and Jason Marsden (seasons 2, 3 & 4)
A teenage boy mutated into a humanoid armadillo, Carmendillo possessed a bulletproof hide and could be launched like a projectile. He lives in garbage cans and steals food, and mostly has his mind set on eating, (he hates robbing places with no food courts). At one point, Carmendillo was accompanied by a dog-like Bang Baby, (similar to the Blood Syndicate character Dogg), whom he calls "Chomper". Carmendillo had worked with the Meta-Breed and the Meta-Men, but mostly operated by himself, serving pretty much as comic relief. In every episode he appeared, he only acts at the beginning and is quickly defeated, sometimes without interfering with the central plot.
He is always in a group for one episode and then quits stating that he would not be in any group again seen in A League of Their Own. It is unknown why he joined The Meta-Breed and The Meta-Men. When he first worked for The Meta-Breed, he got scared due to Ebon hearing his brother is one of the good guys after nearly robbing a store; he was defeated after getting repelled by Static, but was later freed by Ebon. He almost fought Static again but did not and was so scared that he hid in a ball pen and quit. His work with The Meta-Breed was short after being taken out by Hawkgirl. Afterwards, he fought Static again on his own stating that he's been working out and is muscular and his eyes started to have pupils. He is last seen in the episode "Where Rubber Meets The Road" and is seen in a bar with other bang babies and makes fun of Tarmac stealing a valuable generator for only a $1000 and informs him of Alva's $1.000.000 reward.


=== MonsterEdit ===
Real Name: Tamara Lawrence
Voice Actor: Ariyan Johnson (Tamara Lawrence) Dee Bradley Baker (Monster)
A teenage girl that was caught in the Big Bang. She can now turn into a monster and has superhuman strength. She wanted revenge on her boyfriend Marcus Reed for not showing up at the docks, so she decided to frame him. With her appearance, she could easily do so. Static and Gear bought this at first, but Static found out and defeated her. She was taken into custody soon after that.
She appeared in Power Outage after she was weakening due to Dr. Todd's Bang Baby cure which was spreading through the air. She joined Ebon's crew to regain them, along with several other Bang Babies.


=== Ebon/Hot-Streak - "Ebon-Streak"Edit ===
Voice Actor: No lines
When Dr. Todd’s Bang Baby cure was transforming them back into humans, Ebon staged a plan to get the last vial of Bang Baby gas and stage another “Big Bang”, one that would potentially create more Bang Babies than the first one.
Ebon and Hot-Streak fought over the final vial of gas and, being exposed to an overdose of it, merged into one giant Bang Baby-monster which combined both their powers. With Static and Gear being the only two remaining Bang Babies, they were able to take down Ebon-Streak by blowing up a fuel tank inside their body, but it remains unknown whether both survived this final confrontation.


== The Rough PackEdit ==
The Rough Pack are a gang of three Bang Babies led by Hyde but the group went inactive after Kangor and Ferret left the group; Ferret wanted to fend for himself while Kangor was going to find a better group.


=== HydeEdit ===
Voice Actor: Tone Lōc
Real name unknown, Hyde is physically mutated with thick folded skin, making him tougher and stronger (like the Rhino from Marvel Comics' Spider-Man comics). Hyde managed to grab a piece of Static's coat, had Ferrett track down Static for some payback for ruining his plot, and nearly discovered his identity. The alias 'Hyde' comes from the fact that his skin has become thick and wrinkly like a rhinoceros or an elephant's 'hide'. Hyde's lead was short after being defeated by Static who turned him into a basketball.


=== KangorrEdit ===
Voice Actor: Kevin Michael Richardson
Kangorr is an original character to the animated series who has never appeared in the comic books. Kangorr's real name is never mentioned, and much of his backstory is never brought up in the series—-which puts Kangorr across as just another juvenile delinquent gangbanger, but with some common sense, making him into one of the more formidable Bang-Babies in the series. Kangorr was another of the victims of the Bang Baby gas incident at the docks. A Jamaican American in his late teens, Kangorr speaks with a Jamaican accent, and Jamaican music starts to play whenever he shows up or starts a fight. According to the episode "Gear", Kangorr had done time in Juvenile hall with Ivan/Ebon in the time back before the Big-Bang.
Kangorr’s exposure and reaction to the Big Bang gas has super-developed his lower body, especially his feet; the bone and muscle mass of Kangorr's legs and feet is noticeably larger than his upper body, endowing him with incredible lower body strength and giving rise to his nom-de-crime. Kangorr prefers to get around by jumping rather than by walking, (probably because of his big feet keep getting in the way of each other due to their size.) In battle, Kangorr typically leaps or cartwheels into action; his kicks are powerful enough to smash stone and concrete with one hit.
Aside from being the first villain featured in the intro for season two—Kangorr makes his first appearance in The Big Leagues. Kangorr, along with Hot-Streak, Talon, Shiv, under the leadership of The Joker formed up a new team in Dakota. He is first seen when Ferret's gag is taken off and the members of The Joker's crew are revealed. Kangorr uses his feet later on to break into the Dakota Bank in a heist along with the other Bang Babies in The Joker's crew. Kangorr is arrested at the end of the episode, but comes back to make his second appearance in season 2 in "Static Shaq" as a part of The Rough Pack. Only to get a taste of his own medicine by Shaq.
Kangorr was the first known Bang Baby to be seen cured by Dr. Todd’s aerosol Bang Baby cure at the end of the series.


=== FerretEdit ===
Voice Actor: Chick Vennera
Another victim of the Big Bang gas, Ferret’s nose became much larger and gave him an incredible sense of smell, which was so acute he could tell Static was coming by smelling the ionized oxygen which surrounded him when his power was active.
Ferret’s encounters with Static were few. Ferret seems to be a big fan of Shaquille O'Neal, but was forced by Hyde to attack him, while he's hesitate into attacking the famous NBA Player, and ultimately defeat by him. Ferret’s second encounter with Static was at a farmer's market, but ended with the Joker gassing him. He was cured by Batman’s antidote and eventually began to cause trouble again, but not before along with all the other Bang Babies, he was reverted to his human form, when the antidote was spread throughout the city. Ferret does not really fight because of his size and non-offensive power, but is forced to by Hyde in Static Shaq and was defeated and again taken into police custody. After that Ferret and Kangor both quit and joined The Meta-Breed; Ferret did not return until Season 4. Like most of the other Bang Babies, he was changed back to normal by Dr. Todd's antidote.


== Other villainsEdit ==


=== Aaron PriceEdit ===
Voice Actor: R.J. Knoll
Aaron Price is a teenage boy who hangs out with several unruly crowds. Aaron was in reform school when the Big Bang happened and he wanted to gain powers for himself. When he's released and finds out about his step-brother Dwayne’s Bang Baby powers (the ability to warp reality), Aaron tells his brother to manipulate them to get him free money and other goods from the banks and malls of Dakota. Static eventually discovers what’s going on and tells Dwayne to stop listening to his brother. While Dwayne didn't believe what Static was saying (and tried to kill him in a rage), Static plays a tape of himself (as Virgil) and Aaron talking. The tape was all that Dwayne needed to hear, as Aaron frequently expressed his dislike of Dwayne in the recording. After Aaron ordered him to kill Static, Dwayne stopped listening to his step-brother and Static stuck Aaron to a wall. Aaron was then arrested and sent to prison.


=== ChainlinkEdit ===
Voice Actor: Bumper Robinson
Once a member of the same gang as Dule, both were exposed together to the Big Bang gas and both gained metal tentacles and the ability to absorb metal objects, but Chainlink suffered the brunt of the attack. While Dule could hide his powers, Chainlink could not and was forced to hide in the shadows.
Jealous of the success and fame of his brother's football career, Chainlink attempted to extort Dule into giving him 90% of all his earnings. After Dule attempted to kill Chainlink but failed, the two had a final showdown at the football stadium, where Chainlink was eventually defeated and taken away by the police. He is similar to the Marvel character Doctor Octopus.


=== Edwin Alva Jr./OmnifariousEdit ===
Voice Actor: Matt Ballard
The son of Edwin Alva, he uses stolen Big Bang gas to give himself a variety of temporary metahuman powers (Edwin Alva Jr. found a way to have control over the gas) and called himself "Omnifarious" (at first, Static mistakes this for "I'm nefarious."). At first, Alva Jr. attacked his father's factories, warehouses, and cargo ships in order to finally gain his father's respect since he never had time for his son. Later, Alva Jr. combined all the samples of his altered/refined mutagenic gas, intending to use all those powers to destroy the main Alva Industries building, but was instead turned into stone following an overload. He was the first villain to learn Static's real identity.
Ironically, only after losing his son in this way did Alva Sr. realize what he had lost and committed all possible resources into restoring him to flesh and blood, including hiring Specs and Trapper as additional help (a useless move, since they would work on their own secret projects rather than do what their employer said). In No Man's Island, Alva finally restores Edwin Jr. to normal with the combined help of Static, Gear, and Hot-Streak. When Edwin Jr. turned back into flesh and blood, he had no powers and was completely back to normal.


=== Royce AxelrodEdit ===
Voice Actors: Bumper Robinson
Royce Axelrod was a student at Dakota Union High School, but was in fact nothing more than a thug; Royce is an aggressive juvenile delinquent and an impulsive thief with a history of stealing prior to the events of the episode Pop's Girlfriend. His 'best friend' (the term is used loosely) was Frankie, his shadow, lap-dog, doormat, flunky, and 'Yes-Man' for most of the episode. It was hinted in the episode that he may have had some prior association with F-Stop. Although not a Bang-Baby originally, Royce's exposure to vapors of a stolen sample of concentrated Big Bang liquid turns him into a large, misshapen humanoid Bang Baby, with light pink skin and reduces his mind to a primitive caveman-like mentality. Royce's only appearance was in the episode Pop's Girlfriend.
In his first appearance in the episode, Royce and Frankie are racing to catch the subway; Royce pushes a news stall vendor down as he reaches the steps, followed by Frankie who then both proceed to jump over the ticket stalls to avoid paying and run to get on the train before the doors close. While still on the train, Royce sees a large man in a fancy suit, with a metal briefcase handcuffed to his wrist, who then sits down and unlocks the cuffs to tend to his wrist—Royce sees an opportunity to take the briefcase, (even though he has no clue what's inside) and times it so that the doors have closed after he and Frankie have made it off and the man is trapped inside. At school, when a preoccupied Virgil Hawkins bumps into Royce by accident, Royce was hostile towards him, ignoring Virgil's apology and would have started a fight had the principal not been there in the hallway watching the whole thing. Richie Foley comments on what Royce's trouble-making tendencies would result in: "Royce Axelrod: most likely to be sent Upstate."
In an alley, after school, Royce and Frankie having taken the metal briefcase, break into it with a screwdriver and discover three vials of a glowing purple liquid inside, along with some papers remaining hidden from a patrolling police car, they keep the briefcase with them now hoping to turn the "purple stuff" into "green stuff." Royce keeps the briefcase hidden in his locker because he can't keep it at home; according to him, "after that shoplifting thing, my mom's been on the lookout for stuff that don't belong to me." Royce then brings up the papers he found inside and tells Frankie they're going to stay behind after school so that Frankie can use the computers to look up the vial's codes "about the purple stuff."
When their research reveals that the 'purple stuff' they stole is, in fact, "Big Bang Super-Juice," Royce decides to inhale some the gas, only thinking about the super powers that the gas could give him, "like it did to F-Stop," but Frankie speaks out against it and their arguing causes a few drops to fall into a wastepaper basket, and before their actions went any further, the arrival of a teacher makes them leave the computer lab with the case hidden away. Their actions however, were not without consequences as a spider and a cockroach are exposed to the Big Bang liquid that spilled into the bin, and grow to giant size.
The next day, Royce appears at school, and to Frankie's surprise, Royce had grown noticeably bigger, taller, and stronger than before, able to tear a hardback school textbook in half like it was paper, and, to Frankie's dismay, blows Frankie off as a "loser," now that the Big Bang liquid was starting to take effect. This is not enough for Royce; after the results of just smelling the gas, he plans to drink the liquid and see what will happen to him next. Royce never got to go through with it; during a class test, Royce spontaneously mutates into a hideous, misshapen humanoid Bang-Baby, with pale pink skin and a primitive mentality. The 'monster' that Royce had now become attacked anyone within reach. In the end, Static restrained Royce using the arms of a statue to confine him.
What became of Royce after these events was never revealed before the series cancellation, though it can be assumed he was most likely subjected to Dr. Todd's Bang Baby cure when he exposed Dakota City to it.


==== FrankieEdit ====
Voice Actor: Rel Hunt
Frankie, (last name unknown) is/was a student at Dakota Union High School. Frankie is a juvenile delinquent, who hung out with Royce all the time. For most of the episode, Frankie can be seen as Royce's lap dog, going along with all of Royce's antics, until Royce opts to expose himself to samples of Big Bang gas they had found in a metal briefcase they had stolen from a man on the subway. Frankie however, was against exposing himself to the gas, not wanting to become a freak.
When Royce's initial reaction to the gas had him grow taller in size, he more-or-less blew Frankie off as a "loser" in favor of his new status. When Royce mutated into a misshapen humanoid in the middle of class, Frankie was confronted by Virgil Hawkins, who then knew that Frankie knew where the stolen briefcase with the vials of Big Bang gas were hidden. Frankie's fate after the events of the episode remains unknown.


=== LeechEdit ===
Voice Actor: David Arquette
Leech is able to do just what his name implies—leech the powers from any Bang Baby and keep them as his own (like his bloodsucking namesake, only different). Unfortunately, after a while the powers would wear out, and Leech required the host to be “sucked” dry again. Every time he drains an unwilling host's powers, he gets a physical feature of them, like a hairdo (as was the case with Hotstreak and Static) or something related to the host's power (like Talon's wing feathers on her arms).
While he had some of the most powerful Bang Babies in his clutches, including Ebon, Hotstreak, Talon, and Static, he had the chance to steal Gear's powers, but not knowing he had any, Leech claimed his powers were "the kind you could buy from a hardware store." His plans were foiled by Static and Lil’ Romeo. Remembering what Static had said about his powers, Lil’ Romeo “shorted” out Leech after he absorbed Static’s powers, frying him and leaving him unconscious. He is based on Parasite from Superman: The Animated Series.


=== Madelyn SpauldingEdit ===
Voice Actor: Kimberly Brooks
Once attending Dakota Union High School, Madelyn Spaulding was a self-centered and controlling girl. During Season 2 in the episode "Attack of the Living Brain Puppets", no one wanted to vote for her for freshman class president, which was so stressful for her that it triggered her Bang-Baby powers. She used her newly discovered powers to brainwash the students, making them behave like zombies (or "brain puppets," as her victims were referred to in the episode.) Virgil was able to evade her mind control because his powers enhanced his body's natural electrical field to block her power. Once she entered Richie's mind, she discovered Static's secret identity. After having Pops, Sharon, Richie, and all of the other Dakota Union students turn against him, as a result of Madelyn's mind control, Static electrified her brain, erasing her memory of ever being a bang-baby and of Static's secret identity. At the end of this episode, Madelyn was hospitalized.
Madelyn shows up again later during Season 4 in the episode "She-Back!". She was released from the hospital but was not allowed back in school, forcing her to work at a comic book store. She was only able to remember a few moments from her encounter with Static. Her encounter with the superhero resulted in the loss of her original powers and the gaining of new powers, which enabled her to telekinetically move things. This was triggered from her anger caused by thinking Virgil and Richie were laughing at her.
She freed members of the Meta- Breed from jail and took the role as leader of the team. Her lead was short however, as she fought with Ebon over leadership. Static shows up and once again, shocks Madelyn's mind into submission and defeats the Meta-Breed with the help of Gear and She-Bang. This is the last episode Madelyn appears in.


=== PuffEdit ===
Voice Actor: Kimberly Brooks
Real name unknown. Puff's exposure to the Big-Bang granted her the ability to either partially or completely transmute her body back and forth from her human state into a mass of living gas, in which state, Puff can become as light as air, allowing her to fly and become somewhat intangible. This also makes her vulnerable to water or large gusts of wind when she's in her gaseous state. The nature of her gaseous state is affected by her moods, this 'Mood-Gas' can become different vapors such as acidic, (which she makes the most use out of, she also learned to compress these and blow them out like darts, calling them "Puff Darts"), knockout gas, which she can exhale at targets and victims, or a combustible gas, (which she can ignite using a blowtorch).
According to her first appearance in "Bent Out of Shape", in season 1, Puff and her partner in crime, Onyx dropped out of school after they got their powers, afterwards they lived on the street and Puff started calling herself "Puff". She has more of a temper than Onyx. When they see that a reward is being offered for the capture of Rubberband Man, Puff decides that they will become bounty hunters. While Puff and Onyx would consider themselves to be aspiring bounty hunters, they are basically no-more than thieves and mercenaries working for whoever pays them the most. Puff has always been seen accompanied by Onyx, but she did briefly lead a group of Bang-Babies she'd named the "Meta-Men", a team consisting of herself, Onyx, Hot-Streak and Carmendillo, who she had recruited to gang-up on Static and Gear; the Meta-Men, however, were easily dispatched by the Flash, the Batman and Hawkgirl; after this, the Meta-Men never reassembled.
Puff originally appeared in the Static Milestone comics, in a teamup with a girl called "Coil", a girl who could telekinetically control ropes. Her powers are similar to Vapor from the U-Foes.


==== OnyxEdit ====
Voice Actor: Kevin Michael Richardson
Real name unknown. Onyx's exposure to the Big Bang transformed him into a giant purple-colored 'boy of stone', granting him superhuman strength and durability, but which also makes him physically slow, heavy and ungraceful. He essentially serves as Puff's strong man, who is able to crush and smash things in his way with very little effort. Onyx is usually more mellow than Puff and early on tries to be the voice of reason, but would always do what she tells him to in order to get the job done.
Onyx is Puff's longtime friend, even before they were exposed to the Big Bang gas. According to his first appearance in "Bent Out of Shape", in season 1, Onyx and his partner in crime, Puff, dropped out of school after they got their powers, afterwards they lived on the street and he became known as "Onyx". When they see that a reward is being offered for the capture of Rubberband Man, Puff decides that they will become bounty hunters. While Puff and Onyx would consider themselves to be aspiring bounty hunters, they are basically no-more than thieves and mercenaries working for whoever pays them the most.


=== RagtagEdit ===
Voice Actor: Richard Libertini
An old man that was affected by the Big Bang gas, Ragtag is able to transfer Bang Baby powers; this allows him to temporarily bestow abilities unto ordinary humans as well as relinquish those belonging to actual metahumans, but apparently he cannot make use of any powers himself. His only real "power" is the one he holds over the people he gives the powers to; once they wear off, they always return to him. In order for him to keep giving, they must steal for him. However, it works both ways as he can suck the powers out of a metahuman as well as seen with his battle with Static.
Static eventually found out about Ragtag's powers and took him down with the help of Richie.


==== Run, Jump, and PushEdit ====
Voice Actor: Jason Marsden (Push), Kenny Blank (Jump), Philip Tanzini (Run)
The three cohorts of Ragtag, all of whom he granted special powers to do his dirty work for him. Run has super-speed, allowing him to move at a higher rate, both in locomotion and mobility. Jump can practically jump through space instantly - an ability preferably referred to as teleportation. Push can generate purple energy (usually from the hands) to repel or deflect objects (hence the name); Push can also use this power defensively by generating a protective sphere around himself, capable of holding outside forces at bay, at least for as long as he still has power in him. He could also use his powers to exercise a form of levitation where he channels his power to the ground to act as propulsion, propelling him high into the air. Run resembles DC's The Flash and Marvel's Quicksilver, Jump resembles Nightcrawler, and Push resembles the Green Lantern.
“Push” is really Richie Foley, friend of Static. When Ragtag gave him his powers, he would not tell Static where they came from; but when Richie was forced to steal for Ragtag, he turned on Run and Jump and sounded the alarm. Static showed up and together they took Run and Jump down.


=== ReplayEdit ===
Voice Actor: Neil Patrick Harris
Johnny Morrow was a child superstar, but as he got older, people forgot about him. When he was afflicted by the Big Bang gas, Johnny gained the ability to replicate himself, making stealing items and running from the cops incredibly easy. Replay is similar to Multiple Man from Marvel Comics.
In a tangle with Static, Johnny accidentally replicates Static instead of himself. With this Static clone, Johnny takes Static for a "crime spree" across Dakota, framing Static in the process. Static eventually discovers what’s going on and puts a stop to Replay with the help of Richie, who put the fight between Static and his clone live on air, publicly revealing the duplicity.
Replay's former career as an out-of-work child star may be a reference to Harris' previous role on the live action sitcom Doogie Howser, M.D..


=== ReplikonEdit ===
Voice Actor: Coolio
Replikon is a metamorph with the ability to change his appearance at will and alter his molecular structure. Jealous of his friend’s success, Replikon terrorized Rubber-Band Man about his record deal with A.J. McLean. Repilkon captured A.J. and posed as him to get a deal signed with Replikon instead of Rubber-Band Man. His plan was eventually revealed, and Static took Replikon down.
The character's overall visual design is clearly based on Coolio, who also voices the character.


=== Specs and TrapperEdit ===
Voice Actor: Patton Oswalt (Specs); Michael Rosenbaum (Trapper)
Specs and Trapper are two villains Static encounters in Static Shock. They are upperclassmen in the Vanmoor Institute of Science who contemptuously pride themselves of being much smarter than anyone else. Patton Oswalt voices Specs and Michael Rosenbaum voices Trapper. In "The New Kid", Specs and Trapper, on the orders of Edwin Alva, tell the students to build an electronic eye to track static electricity; in actuality, they plan to use these devices to track Static down, using a giant robot they control. However, they are defeated, and as a consequence, they seek revenge on Static.
Much later (in Trouble Squared), they are hired by Edwin Alva Sr. to help restore his petrified son, but Specs and Trapper have other ideas; to effect their revenge on Static, they use the technical facilities to construct special equipment and adopt supervillain personae: Specs becomes Spectral and Trapper becomes Speedtrap. After they capture Static, however, Alva fires them because he is no longer primarily interested in capturing his enemy, and because after Static broke free, they damaged some of the equipment that was to be used in Alva Jr.'s restoration in their attempt to recapture him. So Specs and Trapper hit upon a new plan: destroy Edwin Alva's son. At the end, Static saves Alva's son, and Specs and Trapper are both taken to jail.
Some time later (in Where the Rubber Meets the Road) Specs and Trapper have gone truly renegade. They pay a Bang-Baby called Tarmack to steal a state-of-the-art fusion engine from Alva Industries. They plan to hold the city for ransom. They turn on Tarmack out of greed, and in the middle of a fight with Static, Gear, and Rubber-Band Man, Tarmack makes off with the fusion engine. In the end, Static and Gear defeat Specs and Trapper by disabling their gadgets, and Rubber-Band Man subdues Tarmack and disables the unstable fusion engine.


=== Speed-WarpEdit ===
Voice Actor: James Arnold Taylor
Speedwarp is a villain who is able to move very quickly. His real name is Eddie Felson. He was called "Weird Eddie, the nerd who all the other nerds would pick on", according to Static. Eddie knew Virgil and Daisy from a science camp and developed an obsessive crush on her. After getting an internship at a laboratory, he steals a device called the Time Gauntlet, which allows the wearer to move so quickly it appears that the world is standing still. He uses his new power for thievery and offers to steal gifts for Daisy, he also discovered Gear's and Static's identities with it. When his colleague Dr. McDonald discovers this, he leaves a message on Eddie's answering machine that he had seen security footage of him stealing the Time Gauntlet and advises him to turn himself in immediately. With the Time Gauntlet, Speedwarp uses it to reclaim the security footage Dr. McDonald was going to turn over to the cops and tries to attempt murder by sabotaging the airplane he was on (which Static and Gear stopped). Gear designs a one-time use device for Static that mimics the Time Gauntlet's affects. Speedwarp uses the Time Gauntlet to crash the B2K concert to get to Daisy, but ended up fighting Static. When Speedwarp touches Static's device, it had the effect of causing him to move extremely slow, and now he can't expose the duo's identities. Static later had the police pick him up, but were told not to rush for he now moved slower than a snail.


=== Star-BurstEdit ===
Voice Actor: David Faustino
Starburst is one of the new villains on the show. His real name is Brandon. A disgruntled employee of Bernie Rast, Starburst attempted to sabotage Bernie’s new reality TV show with Static and Gear. With his knowledge of technology, Starburst was able to create a device that absorbed Static’s powers and after it was activated, humiliated him on TV.
Static and Gear eventually discovered the source to Starburst's powers and were able to disable his suit and reveal to Bernie Rast who it really was that was defeating them on his new reality show. When Bernie Rast learns of this, Brandon told Bernie that he needed the money to start his own TV project. Starburst was taken to jail and has not been heard from since. On a related note, Virgil read an article to Richie that Starburst had learned how to create that technology at a Science Camp.


=== TantrumEdit ===
Voice Actor: John Cho
Whenever Thomas Kim gets angry or upset, he transforms into the “Tantrum”, a purple-skinned, muscular, and violent metahuman that will destroy and wreak havoc on those he was angry at. Similar to Marvel's Hulk, Tantrum is, ironically violent, strong, unintelligent, and sturdy; he is Thomas' polar opposite, like Bruce Banner is to the Hulk. They also both have contempt for their alter ego as when Static kept saying Tantrum was Thomas, he replied, "No. Not Thomas. Thomas weak." Thomas first became Tantrum in a nearby restaurant, destroying the inside and hurling Static into a nearby elevator. The next day, after receiving a 99/100 on an essay from Mrs. Pettibone due to a typographical error, he attacked her in the school parking lot. Later Richie found Thomas' near-perfect essay in the parking lot, leading Virgil and him to suspect Thomas was Tantrum. They confront Thomas about this in his home. Feeling threatened, accused, and teased, Thomas got angry and sent them away, transforming into Tantrum just moments later. Back at the Hawkin's home, Richie and Virgil are watching some home movies, in particular one where baby Virgil is throwing a fit. His mother tells his sister "sometimes you've got to let them work through that crankiness." Minutes later Tantrum arrives, breaking down the front door in the process, angry at them for accusing and teasing him. Virgil manages to distract him so Richie can escape. Virgil (now Static) leads Tantrum away from the inner parts of the city and into an abandoned amusement park. Still enraged, Tantrum began throwing equipment and debris with Static dodging and blocking but not attacking. Static was eventually able to “tire” Tantrum out by letting his rampage run its course without making his anger worse by attacking; by doing this, Tantrum reverted to his human form. Thomas' father seemed to raise his son for academic perfection. This is implied to cause social problems for Thomas, including stress and anger. After Static verifies that Thomas and Tantrum are the same person, he tells this to Mr. and Mrs. Kim, so that Thomas can get help for his problems. It is unknown if Thomas was one of the Bang Babies that was exposed to the Bang Baby cure and, if he was, reinfected again.


=== TarmackEdit ===
Voice Actor: John DiMaggio
Tarmack is one of the characters in the series that originated from the 93-97 Milestone comic book series, making his first appearance in Static issue# 3. Tarmack would also appear in an issue of Blood Syndicate and Icon, as well as the My Name is Holocaust miniseries. Revealed in the comics, Tarmack's real name was Charles Bell.
After the Big Bang, Bell became a transmorph, a large man of living hot tarmac; as such Tarmack is as strong and as tough as tar, able to pummel his way through any obstacle, and is also able to project heat energy to melt obstacles. He is highly vulnerable to water.
Like his comic book incarnation, Tarmack was a character with low intelligence and this element was carried on to his animated portrayal in Where the Rubber Meets the Road; where at intervals throughout the episode, other characters made fun of Tarmack's slow wits and how easily he was talked into doing a job for Specs and Trapper for so little money.
When he was recruited by Specs and Trapper to steal a device from Edwin Alva, Tarmack decided he wanted in on the ransom money. Unfortunately for him, Static and Gear interfered, leaving the ransom money to never arrive. Tarmack's powers are similar to DC's Clayface, and his appearance is similar to Magma from Batman Beyond.


=== OmnaraEdit ===
Voice Actor: Wendie Malick
Dr. Karen Roberts was the head of Edwin Alva’s project to find Static’s secret identity and expose him, but her funding was pulled when Alva lost interest in the project following the revival of his son. Angry with Alva for going back on his word to fund her other project, she found out Static’s identity herself and hired Puff and Onyx to capture his father as blackmail, forcing him into stealing the components she needed for her project back from Alva Industries. Though she initiated the project successfully, Static was able to stop Omnara’s plan of controlling every computer in the world via a virus with the help of an anti-virus created by Gear. She was last seen being carted away by the paramedics, her brain having "crashed" because of the anti-virus.


=== Heavy ManEdit ===
Voice Actor: Ron Perlman
Heavy Man was a scientist who worked with She-Bang's parents on a project involving cell matter absorption. The project was canceled but Heavy Man remained, using himself as a test subject. The results were strength and the ability to absorb non-living matter, but a gruesome look as well. Worse, he was going to become as heavy as a statue and unable to move. So he stole She-Bang's parents and threatened to poison them if they did not help him make an antidote. They devised the antidote, but he had absorbed so much matter at this time, it did not get through his thick skin. He left them to die, but Static, Gear, and She-Bang intervened and while Static fought him, Gear and She-Bang freed her parents. He was beaten when he absorbed too much matter while fighting Static, which accelerated the process and made him too heavy to move. He was last seen being taken away by government officials; it is unknown if they ever found a cure.


== Other charactersEdit ==
Frieda Goren (Danica McKellar): Virgil's friend at school and his initial crush. Though lively and popular in school, she tends to be short-tempered and impulsive, earning her the nickname "Hurricane Frieda". She is an active participant and the driving force of the school's newspaper.
The animated Frieda is made as only a supporting character, as opposed to her comic counterpart, in which she plays Gear's role as Virgil's best friend/confidant/and unofficial sidekick to his Static persona.
Daisy Watkins (Crystal Scales): A girl that had attended an academy for the gifted (Vanmoor Institute) in which she met Virgil. After the events involving two of her fellow students as the culprits, she enrolls in the same school as Virgil, Richie and Frieda. Virgil has a crush on Daisy, although in the first episode, it was shown to be Frieda that he liked.
Sean Foley (Dan Lauria): Richie's father. A tough, blue-collar man. In "Sons of the Fathers", it is revealed that Mr. Foley is a racist who dislikes African-Americans. At the end of the episode, though, Mr. Foley apologizes and resolves to change his ways.
Maggie Foley (Jean Smart): Richie's mother. Appears in "Sons of the Fathers" as a rather quiet, soft-spoken woman.
Bernie Rast (Kevin Michael Richardson): A sleazy, loud-mouth TV producer who always looks out for a big hit to promote his clients, and by extension, himself.
Shelly Sandoval (María Canals): A young news reporter in Dakota who regularly reports on the metahuman activities in town.
Mr. McGill (Phil LaMarr): Virgil's and Richie's algebra and physics teacher. Usually talks with a drawling tone, rendering his students unable to concentrate on his lectures.
Jimmy Osgood (Richard Steven Horvitz): An unstable boy who is a student at Virgil's school and is constantly bullied. This leads him to steal his father's gun and threaten his bully, Nick Connor with it. At first, he seems to surrender after Richie calms him down. However he accidentally shoots Richie in the leg, leaving Jimmy mentally unbalanced. He receives treatment some time later and is sent to a juvenile detention center.


== External linksEdit ==
Static Shock at The World's Finest