The Functional Urban Area (FUA) - formerly known as larger urban zone (LUZ) - is a measure of the population and expanse of metropolitan areas in Europe. It consists of a city and its commuting zone.
The definition was introduced in 2004 by Eurostat, the statistical agency of the European Union (EU), in agreement with the national statistics offices in the member states. Data is provided on cities in the EU, its candidate countries and EFTA countries.
In 2006 LUZ definitions were changed significantly, improving the comparability of LUZ definitions across different countries. Several cities, such as Marseille, Lille and Nice, are excluded by definition from the list of LUZs on technical, definitional grounds, such as the coincidence of the metropolitan area with the urban zone.


== Eurostat's urban definitionsEdit ==
The list below shows the population sizes of cities in the European Union as well as candidate countries and non-EU EFTA countries. The list is limited to those cities whose Larger Urban Zones (LUZ) have populations of at least 500,000. The LUZ represents an attempt at a harmonised definition of the metropolitan area. Eurostat's objective was to have an area from which a significant share of the residents commute into the city, a concept known as the "functional urban region." To ensure a good data availability, Eurostat adjusts the LUZ boundaries to administrative boundaries that approximate the functional urban region.


== Ranking methodologyEdit ==
The list below contains the cities in the European Union and associated countries that participated in the third round of the Urban Audit programme. The cities are ranked by the size of the population of the Larger Urban Zone. The figures in the Eurostat database are an attempt at a compromise between harmonised data for all of the European Union, and with availability of statistical data, making comparisons more accurate. The data used is from the 2006 Urban Audit III, which uses information collected for 2004.


== List of larger urban zones by populationEdit ==
Although the latest round of the Urban Audit also added cities from EFTA countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland) and EU candidate countries, the only candidate country for which there is available data is Turkey. (Marseille, Lille, Nice, Cordoba, Badajoz, Toulon and Montpellier should be added on the updated 2004 list: see the French Wikipedia page for the complete and updated 2004 list.) The 2008 updated data from Urban Audit IV has been partially published (still missing cities). The Urban Audit V with 2011 data was to be published from 2013 on, but as of May 2014 "the results of the 2011 data collection are being collected."


== Urban AuditEdit ==
Eurostat's Urban Audit is about much more than demographics. In order for it to be useful as a policy tool to the European Commission and other authorities it contains data for over 250 indicators across the following domains:
Demography
Social Aspects
Economic Aspects
Civic Involvement
Training and Education
Environment
Travel and Transport
Information Society
Culture and Recreation


== See alsoEdit ==
List of largest cities in the European Union by population within city limits
List of urban areas in the European Union
List of metropolitan areas in Europe by population
Largest metropolitan areas in the Nordic countries
World's largest cities


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
GMES Urban Atlas: PDF files, ZIP files
Eurostat: European cities
Eurostat: Total population in Urban Audit cities, Larger Urban Zone