Catch Me Daddy is a 2014 British thriller film directed by Daniel Wolfe. It was screened as part of the Directors' Fortnight section of the 2014 Cannes Film Festival.
The film received its British debut screening at the 2014 London Film Festival. Sameena Ahmed won the award at the festival for the Best British Newcomer. It was shown at the Leeds Film Festival in November 2014. Wolfe wrote the script with his brother, Matthew Wolfe.


== Plot ==
A young woman has run away from her Pakistani family and is living with her Scottish boyfriend. Living in a caravan the couple get along on minimal resources with Laila working as an assistant at a local hairdresser whilst Aaron looks for work. Laila's brother and a gang of friends track her down, along with two other men on the same mission. Whilst Aaron is out at a local shop, the Asian men track Laila down to the caravan, her brother enters alone and after a confrontation Laila accidentally kills her brother before escaping through a window.
When Aaron receives a photograph on his phone showing his mother tied up and gagged, he and Laila decide to give themselves up. As they walk towards both cars the Pakistani group walk forward and one man repeatedly hits Aaron with an axe. The elder man of the other party runs out of his car with a pistol, furious at the men and tells Laila to get in the car.
They drive off, Laila is returned to her distressed father and the man is paid and drives away. The film ends with Laila forced to place a makeshift noose around her neck and stand on a chair. She begs her father to let her take it off but, in a state of confusion and anger over his son's death, he sits on the floor, head in hands. The film ends leaving the audience to speculate upon Laila's fate.


== Filming locations ==
Much of the film was shot in Todmorden in West Yorkshire with additional filming conducted on the moors near Rishworth and Wainstalls. The caravan park scenes were shot on the outskirts of Bradford. Droylsden and Accrington were also used for scenes where the men are searching for Aaron and Laila. 


== Critical reception ==
The film has a 'fresh' rating of 88% on Rotten Tomatoes.


== References ==


== External links ==
Catch Me Daddy at the Internet Movie Database