The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of 51 of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Red and Green versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== Bulbasaur ==

Bulbasaur (フシギダネ, Fushigidane), the Seed Pokémon, are small, squat reptilian Pokémon that are quadrupedal, with light blue-green bodies and darker bluish-green spots. As a Bulbasaur undergoes evolution into Ivysaur and then later into Venusaur, the bulb on its back blossoms into a large flower.


== Ivysaur ==
Ivysaur (フシギソウ, Fushigisō, Fushigisou), known as the Seed Pokémon, represents the evolved form of Bulbasaur, one of the three starting Pokémon available to players in Pokémon Red and Blue and their various remakes; it evolves into the final form of Venusaur. Aside from becoming taller and heavier than Bulbasaur, its trademark bulb becomes a pink flower-bud, and four leaves now appear at the base of this bud. The Pokémon's legs are more stout, allowing it to hold up the bigger bulb, yet limiting its previous ability to stand on its hind legs. Its eyes now look more aggressive and intimidating. As before, Ivysaur and its bulb share a mutualistic relationship; bathing in sunlight allows both to continue growing. Eventually, the bud will give off a sweet scent, a signal that it will bloom soon, and that its host will evolve. An Ivysaur will spend more time bathing in sunlight in order to reach evolution.
In Super Smash Bros. Brawl, Ivysaur is a playable character, under the command of the Pokémon Trainer. The Trainer also has Squirtle and Charizard, all three of which can be switched between; unlike the other fighters, these Pokémon become fatigued and consequently weaker, and must be switched out long enough to recover. In the animated series, Ivysaur first appears in the 51st episode (Bulbasaur‍ '​s Mysterious Garden) of the Original Series. Numerous Bulbasaur are seen evolving into Ivysaur, except for Ash Ketchum's Bulbasaur, who refuses to. Ash's friend May, however, has a young female Bulbasaur that evolves into Ivysaur, then into Venusaur.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, the character Red receives a Bulbasaur from Professor Oak, which he nicknames Saur. In Chapter 15, "Wartortle Wars", it evolves into an Ivysaur after battling a wild Mankey. In Chapter 30, "Zap, Zap, Zapdos!", Red uses Saur to defeat Lt. Surge's Zapdos. In Chapter 33, "The Winged Legends", Red's Ivysaur evolves into a Venusaur to team up with Blue's Charizard and Green's Blastoise.
GamesRadar editor Brett Elston called Ivysaur the "middle child" of the Bulbasaur evolutionary line, due to it not being as cute as Bulbasaur, yet not as intimidating as Venusaur. However, he described him as a necessary step in the line. An editor for UGO Networks called Ivysaur lame in Brawl and stated that while it was better than Squirtle it was inferior to Charizard. Salon‍ '​s Nick Gillespie called Ivysaur "a blue-green toad with what looks to be a garlic clove on its back". IGN's Lucas M. Thomas and Matt Casamassina wrote that because Chikorita used Razor Leaf in Brawl, Ivysaur likely won't, which they found strange since Ivysaur is "an older and more venerable monster" than Chikorita. Thomas wrote that Ivysaur was proof that four-legged characters can work in Super Smash Bros. IGN's Richard George wrote that Ivysaur in Brawl is "likely to be underestimated at first, but it has some great moves when used properly". IGN editor Lucas M. Thomas wrote it was less recognized than Bulbasaur and Venusaur until it appeared in Brawl. He described it as a "beast to deal with" and as "not too shabby for a monster formerly only known as an in-betweener".


== Venusaur ==

Venusaur (フシギバナ, Fushigibana), is the Seed Pokémon. It is the final stage in Bulbasaur evolution. The seed finally bloomed into a huge flower, vaguely resembling a Rafflesia. The flower constantly draws in sunlight for nutrition, characterized by vivid colors and a soothing aroma, and power, which is much more substantial in the summer. They are always on the move to absorb more sunlight, though they usually remain quiet and still while absorbing it. After it rains, the aroma is much stronger, which attracts other Pokémon.


== Charmander ==

Charmander (ヒトカゲ, Hitokage) first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise. Charmander is known as the Lizard Pokémon. Charmander are small, bipedal lizard-like Pokémon. Most have blue eyes, red-orange skin, four-clawed toes, yellow bellies, and yellow soles under its feet. The end of a Charmander's tail is alight with a flame, and the flame's size reflects both the physical health and the emotional state of the individual. When it rains, steam is said to spout from the tip of its tail. If the flame were to ever go out, the Charmander would die.


== Charmeleon ==
Charmeleon (リザード, Rizādo, Lizardo) is the evolved form of Charmander, and the pre-evolved form of Charizard. Charmeleon, known as the Flame Pokémon, are bipedal lizard Pokémon with yellow bellies and soles, three clawed feet and hands, and a flame at the end of their tails. They are darker-skinned than Charmander, possess a bumpy horn on their heads, and take on a more intimidating appearance. Charmeleon are excessively savage and short-tempered by nature, and they are powerful fighters due to their temperament. The flame on its tail may burn a bluish white when the Pokémon is excited, and the air temperature often raises to very high levels when the tail flame is waved around. It first appears in Pokémon Red and Blue.
Since appearing in the Pokémon series, Charmeleon has received generally positive reception. It has been featured in several forms of merchandise, including figures, plush toys, and the Pokémon Trading Card Game. Charmeleon, along with Pikachu, was featured as one of two Pokémon-themed costumes released in 1999. Grey School of Wizardry faculty member Ash DeKirk compared Charmeleon, along with Charmander and Charizard as "fire-breathing dragons". Author Loredana Lipperini described Charmeleon as an "awkward teenager, full of potential but also of uncertainty." The SCP Journal commented that the Charmander line, which includes Charmeleon, represent the three stages of a dragon's life. Author Joseph Jay Tobin used the line as an example of a line whose names are "rich in cute puns and in a pseudo-Linnean attention to family and genus". GamesRadar editor Brett Elston compared Charmeleon to Ivysaur in how they both lack the cutesy appeal of their previous forms, but are not as intimidating as their next forms. He also comments that Charmeleon, in spite of being named after the chameleon, "sticks to one lifestyle - burning rage." In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine, Charmeleon was voted as one of the best Fire-type Pokémon. They stated "Charmeleon may have lost Charmander's cheery smile but it gained so much in evolution". The Daily Cardinal called Charmeleon the "ugliest dragon of the bunch".


== Charizard ==

Charizard (リザードン, Rizādon, Lizardon) is the evolved form of Charmeleon, which is the evolved form of Charmander. Whereas its pre-evolutions Charmander and Charmeleon are ground-bound lizard-like creatures, Charizard resembles a large traditional European dragon. Charizard are primarily orange, with blue-green wing membranes and a cream-colored belly. The video games describe Charizard as having wings that can carry them close to an altitude of 4,600 feet, flying across the sky and constantly seeking powerful opponents to challenge. They can breathe intense flames that can melt any material, but will never use their fire breath on a less powerful opponent. If Charizard become angry, the flame at the tip of their tail can flare up in a whitish-blue color. Because of their reckless behavior, Charizard are known to unintentionally cause wildfires.


== Squirtle ==

Squirtle (ゼニガメ, Zenigame) is the Tiny Turtle Pokémon, capable of moving either on two feet or on all fours. Their skin is a light blue, and they possess a long, curled tail. When feeling threatened, Squirtle withdraw their limbs into their brown-orange shells and spray water from their mouth with great force, either to attack their opponent or merely to intimidate it. If attacked anyway, their shells are extremely resilient, and provide excellent protection. It shelters itself in its shell, then strikes back with spouts of water at every opportunity. Squirtle's shell is not merely used for protection. The shell's rounded shape and the grooves on its surface help minimize resistance in water, enabling this Pokémon to swim at high speeds.


== Wartortle ==
Wartortle (カメール, Kamēru, Kameil), known as the Turtle Pokémon, is the evolved form of Squirtle. It has a slightly more intimidating appearance than its preceding form; aside from an increased height and weight, it now has darker skin, eyes with smaller pupils, and two protruding fangs. Its shell may receive scars from battles that these Pokémon seek out. A Wartortle also gets a pair of feathery ears, and its tail becomes white, fluffy, and too long to completely hide within its shell; these appendages greatly aid this Pokémon in swimming, acting as oars and/or fins. The tail also happens to be a highly valued collectors' item, which has caused people to hunt this Pokémon, dwindling their numbers. The reason for such poaching may very well be that a Wartortle tail is a symbol of longevity in the Pokémon world, supposedly allowing the creature to live for thousands of years.
In the anime, the first appearance of a Wartortle is when a wild one runs into Ash Ketchum and his friends on Cinnabar Island, seeking help for its clan of Squirtle, Wartortle, and a leading Blastoise, all mysteriously stricken with sleepiness. More Wartortle appear as firefighting Pokémon, and Ash's Squirtle, being an honorary firefighter of its hometown, forms a rivalry with the leader.
GamesRadar editor Brett Elston compared it to Ivysaur and Charmeleon, describing it as a pit stop to a more powerful Pokémon.


== Blastoise ==

Blastoise (カメックス, Kamekkusu, Kamex) is the Shellfish Pokémon, and the final stage in Squirtle evolution. It takes on an appearance radically different from its previous forms; the most obvious change is the addition of two retractable cannons on its shell. It is also a girthier and more imposing figure: the shape of its head is completely reformed; its limbs are now stout and segmented, bearing visible claws; and its once sought-after tail is short and somewhat stubby. The aforementioned cannon spouts allow Blastoise to shoot water with great power and accuracy. These jets can punch through thick steel, and can precisely strike targets from a distance of over 160 feet. The spouts also allow for high-speed tackles.


== Caterpie ==
Caterpie (キャタピー, Kyatapī), known as the "worm" Pokémon, was designed by Ken Sugimori. Satoshi Tajiri, creator of the series, took heavy inspiration from his childhood hobby of insect collection in creating the various Pokémon species. Caterpie was based on the design of a caterpillar, specifically the caterpillar of the Swallowtail butterfly. Caterpie's name is also derived from the word caterpillar. Caterpie have green skin with a yellow underbelly, yellow spots, and large red osmeterium protruding from their foreheads. Their green bodies are useful for camouflage in foliage, their eyes are patterned to scare away predators, their suction-cup feet allow them to climb any surface, and the osmeterium on their heads can project a horrid stench to repel predators. Caterpie is the smallest of all the original Pokémon, and grows in size by shedding its skin. Caterpie evolves into Metapod, and eventually Butterfree. Prior to Pokémon Platinum, It could only ever learn two attacks, Tackle and String Shot, and is severely limited in ability until it evolves.
In the anime, Caterpie was the first wild Pokémon Ash caught. He caught it without a Pokémon battle, which Misty attributed to Caterpie's weakness. Caterpie was quite fond of Misty, but she disliked it due to her fear of Bug-type Pokémon. Caterpie was the first Pokémon Ash sent out against the next Pokémon he tried to capture, Pidgeotto. With a large disadvantage against the Flying-type Pokémon, it was beaten severely. Despite this, when Team Rocket appeared to attempt to steal Pikachu, Ash sent out his weakened Caterpie against them, taking down both James's Koffing and Jessie's Ekans by itself using String Shot and Tackle, evolving into Metapod. This Metapod eventually evolved into Butterfree, which left Ash to be with other Butterfree.
Caterpie was featured on a postage stamp series in Great Britain. Caterpie was part of a series of plastic toys released of the original Pokémon. In the video games, Caterpie has received mixed reception; while it is often described as cute, it is also criticized as being useless. An IGN editor called "Pokémon of the Day Chick" expressed sympathy for Caterpie, in that most players catch the Pokémon early on in the game, but inevitably discard him in favor of other, more powerful characters. Multiple other IGN editors acknowledged Caterpie's practical uselessness, one calling it "unbelievably pathetic." IGN further likened the Pokémon to an "oversized tomato-horn-worm-lookin' thing" that deserved very little respect. In another article, IGN called Caterpie "really cute," adding that the appropriate reaction to someone using Caterpie in battle is to "laugh out loud, then take it out with pretty much any Pokemon [sic] you can find." The same reviewer expressed the belief that the game designers worked to ensure that Caterpie would "always suck beyond a shadow of a doubt" and called it the second worst Pokémon in the game. IGN praised the Pokémon's name and that the -pie suffix makes it cute. GamesRadar theorized that much of Caterpie's popularity stemmed from its central appearances in the Pokémon anime's first season. However, they themselves claimed to be tired of Caterpie, and the work it took to use it effectively. The book Gaming Cultures and Place in Asia-Pacific cited it as an example of a common recurring and weak element in the games, whose presence rather than function was to emphasize the exclusivity and strength of other, rarer creatures for players to find.


== Metapod ==
Metapod (トランセル, Toranseru, Toranseu), known as the Cocoon Pokémon, are pupal Pokémon found in the wild early in the Kanto and Johto regions, of which its larval form is the caterpillar-like Caterpie. They can evolve into the butterfly-like Butterfree. While Metapod is classified as a cocoon Pokémon, it bears more resemblance to a chrysalis. A Metapod's exterior is regularly hardened to protect its soft and tender innards while undergoing metamorphosis to eventually become a Butterfree. To conserve energy for this event, the Metapod barely moves. While this shell is said to be as hard as steel, a large sudden impact could cause its vulnerable body to pop out, leaving it completely exposed.


== Butterfree ==
Butterfree (バタフリー, Batafurī), known as the Butterfly Pokémon, are fully developed, butterfly-like Pokémon that have hatched from their pupal Metapod forms. Butterfree resembles a vaguely anthropomorphic butterfly. Unlike true insects, it only has four legs, which are a pale blue color. It has a nose-like structure which is a similar color. Its body’s coloration is a darker purple-blue. It has large veined wings which are white with black markings. These markings can help distinguish male and female individuals. It has large compound eyes which tend to be a reddish color. Butterfree feed on honey from flowers, and they rub the honey onto the hairs on their legs to transport the honey back to their nests. Like members of the order Lepidoptera, Butterfree’s wings are covered in fine scales that are water-repellant and allow it to fly in heavy rains, something many other insect Pokémon such as Masquerain cannot do, and are also coated in toxic dust that can be directed at an opponent in battle through wing-flapping. Butterfree can be seen multiple times in the anime one episode you can find it in is Bye Bye Butterfree.


== Weedle ==
Weedle (ビードル, Bīdoru, Beedle), known as the Hairy Bug Pokémon, are larval Pokémon found in the wild early in the Kanto and Johto regions. They are very weak Pokémon that are captured to be evolved into their cocoon-like Kakuna form and eventually into the hornet-like Beedrill form. Weedle have little pink feet and a pink, round nose. Commonly spotted in the forests and grasslands, eating leaves, Weedle are well-protected from predators by sharp two-inch barbs on their heads which secrete a strong poison, and another stinger is on each Weedle's rear. Sniffing with its big red proboscis, a Weedle uses its extremely acute sense of smell to find the types of leaves it eats. Often living in forests and grasslands, it eats its weight in leaves every day.
Loredana Lipperini, author of Generazione Pókemon: i bambini e l'invasione planetaria dei nuovi, commented that Weedle's stinger made it appear more wild-like than Caterpie. San Antonio Express News editor Susan Yerkes described Weedle as "disgustingly cute". Destructoid's Jim Sterling included it in his list of 30 "rubbish" Pokémon in Pokémon Red and Blue. He called it a "centipede thing" and criticized it for its "shitty, lazy facial features" such as what he calls the "'whack a horn on it' mentality of Goldeen and Seel". He added that while Caterpie resembles a caterpillar, Weedle is a "joke". IGN included Weedle as part of a poll of younger viewers on their favourite Pokémon.


== Kakuna ==
Kakuna (コクーン, Kokūn, Cocoon), known as the Cocoon Pokémon, are pupal Pokémon found in the Kanto and Johto regions, of which its larval form is the worm-like Weedle. They can evolve into the hornet-like Beedrill. Kakuna is a yellow, cone-shaped cocoon Pokémon. Kakuna has a dome-shaped head and black, triangular eyes. Within the shell, a Kakuna busily prepares itself for evolution into its adult form, and the amount of energy released by this process makes the shell hot to the touch. Kakuna can use a poisonous sting to defend themselves if disturbed.


== Beedrill ==
Beedrill (スピアー, Supiā, Spear), known as the Poison Bee Pokémon, are fully developed, wasp-like Pokémon that have hatched from their pupal Kakuna forms. Although they are hornet-like, they only have four legs, the front two tipped with long stingers. It has veined wings, and another stinger on its abdomen that contains its most potent venom. Beedrill are extremely territorial, and will be set off by anything that approaches a Beedrill nest. When angered, Beedrill attack in a furious swarm.
In comparing Beedrill to Butterfree, Brett Elston argued that both were there to demonstrate evolution to new players, adding that Beedrill focuses more on dealing damage than Butterfree does. He notes that Beedrill, like Butterfree, will be replaced with more powerful Pokémon. Boys' Life named Beedrill the third of five "coolest" Pokémon from Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen.


== Pidgey ==
Pidgey (ポッポ, Poppo), known as the Tiny Bird Pokémon, resembles a small, plump-bodied bird. It is a brown color, with a lighter colored throat and belly. The tips of its wings share this cream color. Both its feet and beak are a pinkish-gray color. Its plumage is fairly nondescript, particularly compared to its evolutions Pidgeotto and Pidgeot. It has black markings around its eyes and a small crest of brown and cream feathers above its eyes. Pidgey are docile and prefer to avoid conflict. If disturbed, however, it can ferociously strike back and will use its wings to stir up clouds of sand in an attempt to distract its would-be opponent and escape. Pidgey also uses this technique to bring its preferred prey of small insects into the open. Pidgey seems to possess magnetoception, as it is capable of returning to its nest from any location without fail.
Loredana Lipperini, author of Generazione Pókemon: i bambini e l'invasione planetaria dei nuovi, commented that while Pidgey's name was based on pigeon, it more closely resembled a sparrow. GamesRadar editor Brett Elston attributed Pidgey's popularity to being commonly seen in the anime as well as being a solid Pokémon. The Independent described Pidgey as a "cute-looking monster" and a "moderately angry pigeon."


== Pidgeotto ==
Pidgeotto (ピジョン, Pijon, Pigeon), known as the Bird Pokémon, is a larger and stronger form that Pidgey takes when it gains enough experience. It is a large raptor-like bird. While its primary color is brown, its plumage is much more elaborate than its pre-evolution, Pidgey. Its head-crest is much longer than Pidgey's and is a reddish color. The plumage of its tail is also quite colorful, alternating between red and yellow. Other than its ornamental plumage, its basic coloration is similar to Pidgey, with pinkish-gray feet and black markings around its eyes. Pidgeotto is extremely territorial, generally claiming a large area with its nest built in the center. Full of vitality, it constantly patrols its territory, mercilessly attacking intruders. They fly about in circular patterns while hunting, and can spot the movements of their prey on the ground no matter how high they fly. Pidgeotto attacks with its wickedly sharp talons and carries its prey, including Exeggcute and Magikarp, back to its nest from as far as 60 miles away or more. Pidgeotto appeared in the Pokémon anime as one of series star Ash Ketchum's first Pokémon. It eventually evolved into Pidgeot.


== Pidgeot ==
Pidgeot (ピジョット, Pijotto, Pigeot), known as the Bird Pokémon, is the fully grown and developed form of the Pidgey species evolution line. Pidgeot is noticeably larger than its pre-evolution. Its plumage tends to be larger and glossier. The feathers on its head-crest are nearly as long as its body, and are yellow and red. Its tail feathers are red colored. Like its previous evolutions, its underbelly is a tan color, and it has black markings around its eyes. With their powerful chest muscles at work, Pidgeot can flap their wings fast enough to whip up gusts of winds to rival tornadoes. Pidgeot are very aerodynamic, capable of soaring to an altitude of 3300 feet and reaching speeds of up to Mach 2. Like Pidgeotto, Pidgeot feed on Magikarp by swooping from the sky and snatching them out of the water with their talons. Pidgeot appear very similar to Pidgeotto, so much so that one has been easily mistaken for the other, even by official sources. Ash's Pidgeotto evolves into Pidgeot in the anime, and leaves his Pidgeot to protect its a group of Pidgey and Pidgeotto.
Loredana Lipperini, author of Generazione Pókemon: i bambini e l'invasione planetaria dei nuovi, described it as a predator of beetles, much like real birds.


== Rattata ==
Rattata (コラッタ, Koratta) is known as the Mouse Pokémon. Rattata resemble small purple rats with large red eyes, cream bellies, paw soles and square fangs. Rattata has a long, slightly, purple curled tail. Rattata has large incisors and a long whisker on both sides that may be worn down by gnawing. Rattata have three-toed paws, which are the same color as its underbelly. They walk on four legs. Rattata has a large teeth, which grow constantly to gnaw on hard things to wear them down. Rattata are among the earliest Pokémon that can be caught by players, so much so that it is said that the presence of one Rattata indicates the presence of more than forty Rattata in the area. They make their nests almost anywhere and as extreme omnivores eat anything they can scavenge. A Rattata's fangs grow continuously throughout its lifespan, so it whittles them down to a comfortable size by gnawing on hard objects. They are best known for their Quick Attack, which allows them to strike their enemy first, even if it is not their turn to do so.
Fellow GamesRadar editor Raymond Padilla criticized both Rattata and Raticate's design for being too similar to its inspiration and described it as a "filthy rodent". Author Loredana Lipperini wrote that despite its knife-like fangs, Rattata shares the land peacefully with Pidgey. Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Chris Scullion criticized how common Rattata was and described it as "rubbish". IGN's "Pokémon Chick" wrote that anyone that has never seen a Rattata has never played a Pokémon game. She added that because of its underwhelming nature, it is usually sent to the players' PC box. The Escapist‍ '​s John Funk called it a "familiar face".


== Raticate ==
Raticate (ラッタ, Ratta), known as the Mouse Pokémon, is a larger and stronger form that Rattata takes when it gains enough experience. Raticate resemble large tawny rats with small black eyes, a yellow belly, a large cream-colored tail and the ability to stand on its hind legs. Raticate is mostly tawny in color with a cream-colored underside. In the main Pokémon game series, a Raticate is only acquired when a Rattata grows past experience level 20 and is evolved into a Raticate. Compared to a Rattata, a Raticate is far more of a predator, and the majority of its features are adapted for this purpose. Its whiskers give it balance and it slows down if they are cut off. A female always has shorter whiskers. Its webbed feet allow it to swim as it hunts prey, and its fangs are tough enough to topple concrete buildings by gnawing on them.
On the S.S. Anne, Ash traded his Butterfree for a Raticate but traded back towards the end of the episode. Cassidy has a Raticate that for a time served in her and Butch's motto the role that Meowth serves in the motto of Jessie and James. In Showdown at Dark City, Raticate is one of the Pokémon belonging to one of the Trainers at Kas Gym. Mollie has a Raticate she used during the appeals round of the Gardenia Town contest in What I Did for Love. Butch of Team Rocket used a Raticate in The Ole' Berate and Switch. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a Rattata was Yellow's first Pokémon. It later evolved into a Raticate.
GamesRadar editor Brett Elston praised Raticate as a great Pokémon early in the game, but criticized it for losing its usefulness later in the game. While she found it to be a Pokémon that has difficulties later in the game, IGN's "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called Raticate a "nasty surprise" for opponents. She also called Raticate "one of the single most underrated Pokemon in existence". 1UP.com's Michael Vreeland commented that Raticate's "Super Fang" technique was annoying for players when another trainer had it use it on their Pokémon. IGN wrote that while it has the same problems as Rattata does, it has a high attack power.


== Spearow ==
Spearow (オニスズメ, Onisuzume) are known as the Tiny Bird Pokémon. Their English names come from the words "spear" and "sparrow." When they are trained greatly, they can evolve into Fearow. Spearow are very small birds with rough plumage. They have the beak shape similar to that of raptors. Their pink feet each have three talons. They are noted for being frail, for which they make up for with their "Mirror Move" ability. They eat insects in grassy areas by flushing them out with their stubby wings, and plucking at them with their beaks. A Spearow's wings aren't good for long distance travel or high flying, but one is able to fly at high speeds by flapping its wings very rapidly. Spearow are very territorial, constantly buzzing about and calling with a loud cry that can be heard from half a mile away. This cry serves to scare away predators and to keep in touch with other Spearow, though the latter is reserved as an alarm to its kind.
In the very first episode of the animated series (Pokémon, I Choose You!), series protagonist Ash Ketchum attempts to capture a Spearow right outside his hometown, Pallet Town, without his Pikachu's help; he only angers the Pokémon by hurling a pebble at it. Spearow calls out to its large flock, which pursue Ash and Pikachu. Pikachu eventually disperses the flock with massive Thunder, upon witnessing Ash's willingness to sacrifice his safety for Pikachu's. Ash must deal with the flock once more when he returns to Pallet Town, and realizes the Fearow leading the flock had been the Spearow he tried to catch. The flock reappeared in a flashback to that episode Ash had in Lucario and the Mystery of Mew. Professor Oak had a Spearow in the Pokémon Adventures manga. He used it against Green in their Pokémon League battle. It later evolved into Fearow.


== Fearow ==
Fearow (オニドリル, Onidoriru, Onidrill), known as the Beak Pokémon, is a bird Pokémon that evolves from Spearow at level 20. Fearow is a large brown bird with a vulture-like neck. It has a large, long pointed beak and a red crown-like line of spikes upon its head. It also bears huge wings. All characteristics being a radical departure from its short-winged, stubby-beaked pre-evolved form Spearow. Fearow uses its great wings to catch air currents and effortlessly glide over large distances for as long as a day without having to land or rest. It flies high into the sky, and swoops down at its prey. By using a combination of its neck and beak, it has a large reach, allowing it to pluck bugs from the ground or easily pluck prey from soil or water as it swoops down. If it senses danger, it avoids it if possible.
In the animated series, the most notable Fearow is a leader of a flock of Spearow in Pallet Town, and attempts to drive away all the Pidgey in the area. Ash makes a stand against the Fearow, and realizes that it bears a grudge against him; it was the Spearow that Ash attempted to capture in the very first episode. Ash's Pidgeotto fights the Fearow, defeating it when it evolves into Pidgeot. In the Electric Tale of Pikachu manga, Fearow is the first Pokémon Ash catches; similar to the first episode of the anime, Ash and Pikachu flee from angry Spearow, and when Ash protects Pikachu from harm, Pikachu dispatches the flock. Ash decides to take advantage of the situation, and catches the flock's leader, Fearow. Professor Oak had a Spearow in the Pokémon Adventures manga, which later evolved into Fearow.
GamesRadar editor Brett Elston stated that while Fearow lacks the popularity of Pidgeot, it becomes more powerful more quickly.


== Ekans ==
Ekans (アーボ, Ābo, Arbo) is known as the Rattlesnake Pokémon. This reptilian Pokémon has a rattle at the tip of its tail, and is mostly purple while its underbelly, eyes, rattle, and the "bands" on it are yellow. They swallow whole the eggs of small bird Pokémon, such as Pidgey or Spearow. Ekans are able to detach their jaws to swallow large prey whole, although this makes their bodies heavy. Its highly poisonous fangs make it a hazard in the wild as they slither through the grass and unexpectedly strike. Ekans also shares other characteristics as snakes, such as using its tongue to test the air for the presence of prey, and shedding its skin.
UGO Networks featured Ekans and Arbok as part of its "Snake Week" and expressed joy that Pokémon had "at least one snake". They called Ekans a "killer Pokemon" and "a chalky purple snake with a penchant for being defeated". They added that "as reward for sucking so consistently, Ekans was allowed to evolve into 'Arbok,' bigger, badder and more purple than ever" and that Arbok "didn't fare much better than his lower form on the battlefield, but he sure looked cute whenever one of the more heroic Pokemon zapped the crap out of him". Author Loredana Lipperini described Ekans as “treacherous.”


== Arbok ==
Arbok (アーボック, Ābokku), known as the Cobra Pokémon, are a larger and stronger form that Ekans take when they gain enough experience. In the main Pokémon game series, an Arbok is only acquired when an Ekans evolves. Arbok is a reptilian with purple scales over most of its body. It has lost the rattle it had on its tail as an Ekans. Like a cobra, it can spread out its ribs into a hood. On its "hood", it has a design much like an angry face. The frightening patterns on its hood have been studied and six variations have been confirmed. Each design is native to a certain region. It has a nasty bite with deadly venom. Terrifically strong, it is capable of crushing opponents by coiling its body around them and constricting. It can even flatten steel oil drums. Rather vicious, Arbok are territorial. If it encounters an enemy, it raises its head, intimidating the opponent with the frightening pattern on its body, then they lash out at intruders with long fangs tipped with deadly venom. With a vengeful nature, it won't give up a chase after prey or an opponent, no matter how far, once it targets it prey.
IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that Arbok was a favorite among players who like Arbok for being an enemy toward Pikachu and Ash Ketchum in the Pokémon anime. She added that Arbok had "personality to spare and can add a splash of much-needed color and originality to any team." She also wrote that it is "one of the few pure Poison types that isn't a butt-ugly mass of undefined tissue" and referenced Muk and Weezing as examples. She also called Arbok her "beloved". She wrote that while she liked the Pokémon Seviper for being a snake, she will "always love Arbok just a little bit more simply because I was introduced and subsequently latched onto him first". IGN's Pokémon of the Day Guy called it a "swell first Pokémon" and compared it to "Q-Bert‍ '​s arch-nemesis". UGO Networks featured Ekans and Arbok as part of its "Snake Week" and expressed joy that Pokémon had "at least one snake". They called Ekans a "killer Pokemon" and "a chalky purple snake with a penchant for being defeated". They added that "as reward for sucking so consistently, Ekans was allowed to evolve into 'Arbok,' bigger, badder and more purple than ever" and that Arbok "didn't fare much better than his lower form on the battlefield, but he sure looked cute whenever one of the more heroic Pokemon zapped the crap out of him".


== Pikachu ==

Pikachu (ピカチュウ, Pikachū) are mouse-like creatures, and were the first "Electric-type" Pokémon created, their design intended to revolve around the concept of electricity. They appear as mouse-like creatures that have short, yellow fur with brown markings covering their backs and parts of their lightning bolt shaped tails. They have black-tipped, pointed ears and red circles on their cheeks, which can spark with electricity. In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, gender differences were introduced; a female Pikachu now has an indent at the end of its tail, giving it a heart-shaped appearance. They attack primarily by projecting electricity from their bodies at their targets. Within the context of the franchise, a Pikachu can transform, or "evolve" into a Raichu when exposed to a "Thunderstone". In later titles an evolutionary predecessor was introduced named "Pichu", which evolves into a Pikachu after establishing a close friendship with its trainer.


== Raichu ==
Raichu (ライチュウ, Raichū), known as the Electric Mouse Pokémon, is a taller form that Pikachu takes when a Thunder Stone is applied. Raichu is a rather small bipedal rodent. It is able to run faster on all fours. Like Pikachu, Raichu has long ears and feet, and stubby arms; both species also have two horizontal brown stripes on its back. Its long, thin tail has a broad, lightning bolt-shaped end, which is smaller and blunted on females. Raichu is orange in color, with a white belly. Its paws are brown, as well as its toes, while the soles of its feet are tan colored. Its bifurcated ears are brown on the outsides and yellow on the insides, and end in a distinctive curl at their bottom-most point. Unlike Pikachu, with its distinctive red circles, the cheek sacs of Raichu are yellow. It has an aggressive nature if there's too much excess electricity, and can charge up to 100,000 volts.
In the anime, Lt. Surge, the Gym Leader of Vermilion City, has a Raichu that defeated Ash's Pikachu with its sheer power. After discussing evolution with Pikachu to match Raichu's power (Pikachu refused to evolve), Ash used a strategy relying on Pikachu's speed to defeat Raichu the next day. Ever since that moment on, Raichu developed a newfound respect towards Pikachu. Raichu also appeared causing trouble for Pikachu and co. in Pikachu's Vacation, along with Marill, Snubbull, and Cubone.
Lt. Surge has a Raichu in Pokémon Adventures, which was first seen in Silph Co. but never participated in battles until fighting the Masked Man in his Mahogany Hideout, where it helped Surge break in and seemingly backed the mastermind into a corner, until his Houndour called upon dozens of wild Houndour to thwart Surge, instead.
Since it appeared in the Pokémon series, Raichu has received generally positive reception. It has appeared in several pieces of merchandise, including plush toys, figurines, and the Pokémon Trading Card Game. It was also included as part of a Burger King Big Kids' Meal promotion. The Chicago Sun-Times called Raichu an "old favorite." Loredana Lipperini, author of the book Generazione Pókemon: i bambini e l'invasione planetaria dei nuovi, commented that Raichu was not as hugely popular as Pikachu. Ryan Omega, author of the book Anime trivia quizbook: from easy to otaku obscure, episode 1, commented that Raichu "isn't that cute" and that this is why Ash did not want to evolve his Pikachu. Pierre Bruno, author of La culture de l'enfance à l'heure de la mondialisation, compared the battle between Lt. Surge's Raichu and Ash's Pikachu to the Biblical story David and Goliath. IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" noted that Raichu was "loved by many and despised by more," though she clarified that the hatred for Raichu was nowhere near the hatred for Pikachu. She went on to describe it as “stupid-looking.” GamesRadar editor Brett Elston commented that because of the high level of emphasis on Pikachu, it's “easy to forget Raichu even exists.”


== Sandshrew ==
Sandshrew (サンド, Sando, Sand), known as the Mouse Pokémon, are a species of brick-skinned mouse-like Pokémon found in several regions throughout the Pokémon world. Despite its name, Sandshrew's appearance borrows more from the armadillo or the pangolin than from the shrew; its primary means of defense when threatened is to instantly curl up its body into a ball, leaving only its tough skin exposed. When it is rolled up like this, Sandshrew has the potential to withstand many attacks, as well as being dropped from a great height (also similar to hedgehogs). Sandshrew's natural environment is buried in the sand in arid, sandy locations with very little moisture, such as a desert. It chooses this habitat to keep its hide as dry and tough as possible, while the sand also provides it with good camouflage.
In keeping with its physical characteristics, Sandshrew has high Defense in the video games, but low Speed. From Ruby and Sapphire onwards, it has the ability Sand Veil, which increases its evasion during a sandstorm. Sandshrew also appears in the spin-off game Pokémon Snap. In Pokémon Stadium, Sandshrew featured in its own mini game called "Dig! Dig! Dig!", in which players need to dig to the underground well before the others.
A Sandshrew owned by A.J. is featured in the eighth anime episode, "The Path to the Pokémon League." It had many notable traits, such as the ability to withstand water and its knowledge of Fissure, which it used to dispatch Team Rocket. A.J. and his Sandshrew appear as a cameo in Pokémon Yellow.


== Sandslash ==
Sandslash (サンドパン, Sandopan, Sandpan), known as the Mouse Pokémon, are a larger and stronger form that Sandshrew take when they gain enough experience to reach level 22. Generally they are a moderately large, bipedal hedgehog or pangolin-like creature with hard yellow skin, lengthy claws, and a back loaded with an assemblage of large brown spikes. These spikes are hardened sections of Sandslash’s hide that grow to form a natural self-defense when Sandslash curls into a ball. Each spike remains on Sandslash for one year, after which it falls off and a new spike grows in its place. Sandslash can be found in desert areas, particularly close to dry forests. Sandslash's spikes serve a number of purposes to help cope with its environment, such as providing shade to protect it from the sun and heatstroke or using them offensively to harm both predators and prey. It uses its claws to climb trees, cut up food and dig, the latter being an activity that can cause them to break if done too quickly. It cannot run very quickly.


== Nidoran♀ ==
Nidoran♀ (ニドラン♀, Nidoran Mesu), known as the Poison Mouse Pokémon, are a species of poisonous mouse-like Pokémon found in the Kanto, Johto, Sinnoh and Kalos regions of the Pokémon world. Male Nidoran are classified as a separate species of Pokémon from the females due to differences in appearance between genders, such as the female being blue, instead of purple, and having smaller horns than the male. It should be noted that these were the first Pokémon to have known genders until the release of Pokémon Gold and Silver, although they remain as separate species to this date. This Pokémon protects itself with its venomous barbs. A female Nidoran birth is about 15 times more likely than a male one. However Nidoran♀ and Nidoran♂ cannot be bred together in the games, the same rule applies to their evolutions. They are fairly common in Kanto and Johto, but in Sinnoh the PokéRadar is required to find them, and in Kalos, they appear on route 11 (also called Miroir Way) during a Horde encounter.


== Nidorina ==
Nidorina (ニドリーナ, Nidorīna), known as the Poison Pin Pokémon, is comparatively larger than its pre-evolution, though she loses the forehead horn, whiskers, and incisor teeth. Nidorina is turquoise in coloration, with a pale underside. Nidorina's poison spikes are larger, and retract when they are relaxed. She has also gained the ability to stand on her hind legs. Nidorina is the female equivalent of Nidorino. This is shown even in her name, which ends in a as opposed to o in Nidorino. A is traditionally a feminine vowel in the English language, particularly at the ends of names.
Nidorina seems to be more docile and relaxed than her counterpart Nidorino. She is a caring mother, chewing food for her young. Although she would rather not attack at all, she prefers attacks like clawing and biting. She seems to display close family bonds with others of her own kind, and becomes nervous when separated. However, when angered, a Nidorina can become a formidable foe, able to emit ultrasonic cries to confuse opponents. Nidorina live in expansive hot savannas and plains, sharing their home range with Nidorino. They are common in Kanto, but rare in Sinnoh.
Emily's Nidoran♀, nicknamed Maria evolved into Nidorina after battling Team Rocket and kissing Ralph's Nidoran♂, nicknamed Tony, in Wherefore Art Thou, Pokémon?. Gym Leader Whitney has a Nidorina, which was easily defeated by Ash's Cyndaquil in their Gym Battle. Green had a Nidoran♀ in Pokémon Adventures that evolved into a Nidorina. She later evolved into a Nidoqueen.


== Nidoqueen ==
Nidoqueen (ニドクイン, Nidokuin), known as the Drill Pokémon, are a fully grown and developed species of female rabbit, porcupine, gorilla, and rhinoceros-like Pokémon. In the main Pokémon game series, a Nidoqueen can only be acquired when a Moon Stone item is applied to a Nidorina. Nidoqueen seem to be omnivores feeding on shrubs and fruit but they may snack on certain small Pokémon for protein. Also, Nidoqueen are much less aggressive than Nidoking and get along much better with others of their kind. Nidoqueen appears to be slightly weaker, but significantly more intelligent than Nidoking.
One of the most notable Nidoqueens in the Pokémon games is the one owned by Giovanni, the leader of Team Rocket in Pokémon Red and Blue, as well as its remakes, FireRed and LeafGreen. However, he did not use his Nidoqueen until he was battled at the Silph Co. building in Saffron City.


== Nidoran♂ ==
Nidoran♂ (ニドラン♂, Nidoran Osu), known as the Poison Pin Pokémon, are a species of poisonous rabbit-like Pokémon found in the Kanto, Johto, Sinnoh and Kalos regions of the Pokémon world. Unlike most Pokémon, female Nidoran are classified as a separate species from the males due to extreme differences in appearance between genders, such as the male having larger horns and completely different colors than the female. Male Nidoran are purple, and their horns secrete a powerful venom. The size of the horns determines the potency of the venom. Nidoran stiffens its large ears to sense danger. Male Nidoran are born far less frequently, and so the group will try to protect their future bull from harm. They are a fairly common sight in the Kanto and Johto regions, but in the Kalos region they only show up during a horde encounter.


== Nidorino ==
Nidorino (ニドリーノ, Nidorīno), known as the Poison Pin Pokémon, are a larger and stronger form that Nidoran♂ take when they gain enough experience. Nidorino look somewhat like a rhinoceros and a rabbit with needles and horns covering its body. Nidorino is more aggressive than Nidoran♂ and is quick to attack when it notices a threat; its large ears are always on the lookout. The diamond-hard horn on its head secretes a powerful venom and on impact with an enemy, poison leaks out. If it senses a hostile presence, all the barbs on its back bristle up. Nidorino is the male counterpart of Nidorina.
In the main Pokémon game series, a Nidorino can be found as wild Pokémon in the Kanto and Johto regions of the Pokémon world, and it can also be acquired when a Nidoran♂ grows past experience level 16 and is evolved into a Nidorino. It is also notable for being one of the first two Pokémon seen in the anime and in the intro to the game Pokémon Red.


== Nidoking ==
Nidoking (ニドキング, Nidokingu), known as the Drill Pokémon, are a fully grown and developed species of male rabbit, porcupine, gorilla, and rhinoceros-like Pokémon and the final stage in the Nidoran♂ evolutionary line. Its horn is hard enough to pierce a diamond and contains secreted venom, making it a powerful stabbing tool upon prey and Pokémon battle opponents. Nidoking have immense upper-body strength, being able to snap a telephone pole like a dry twig. It uses its tail to smash down its target, then constrict it to break its bones. Its thick tail packs enormously destructive power capable of felling a metal transmission tower. Once a Nidoking goes on a rampage, nothing can be done to stop it. There are far fewer Nidoking than Nidoqueen in the anime. They serve as leaders of herds, with multiple Nidoqueen mates.
In the main Pokémon game series, a Nidoking can only be acquired when a Moon Stone item is applied to a Nidorino. They are the masculine equivalent to Nidoqueen. Nidoking are more primal, fighting other Nidoking for such matters as territory or food (or a Nidoqueen, during mating season). One of the most notable Nidokings in the Pokémon games is the one owned by Giovanni, the leader of Team Rocket in Pokémon Red and Blue, as well as its remakes, FireRed and LeafGreen. However, he did not use his Nidoking until he was battled as the Gym Leader of the Viridian City gym.
In a poll conducted by IGN, it was voted as the 42nd best Pokémon, where the staff commented on how Nidoking does not have a crown. They further stated that "Maybe in Generation VI he’ll finally get the adornments befitting a king".


== Clefairy ==
Clefairy (ピッピ, Pippi) is a small, bipedal Pokémon. Clefairy appears to be a pink creature, with stocky limbs and a round body which gives it a chubby appearance. It also possess large sensitive ears that have brown tips. It has small wings that seem incapable of flight, but allow it to bounce gracefully, and when store moonlight in their wings, allowing them to float in midair. Clefairy was chosen as the main character of the Pokémon manga to make it more engaging for readers. However, Pikachu, who was chosen as the anime mascot, became the mascot for the whole series in order to appeal to younger female readers and their mothers. Clefairy evolves into Clefable by giving it a Moon Stone. The Clefairy family were originally Normal types, but in Generation VI they lost the Normal type and became pure Fairy types instead. The same thing has occurred with the Snubbull family. However, the Clefairy family still has the large move pools associated with the Normal type. Clefairy appear in all entries of the mainline Pokémon titles. They also appear in spin-offs such as Pokémon Stadium and multiple entries in the Super Smash Bros. series.
Clefairy's first anime appearance was in Clefairy and the Moon Stone, in which Ash and his friends meet a group of Clefairy at Mt. Moon, where they pray to a moon stone. It has appeared in subsequent episodes of the series. It also makes appearances in various Pokémon manga series. A timid, shy Clefairy is among the main characters of the Magical Pokémon Journey manga series.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called Clefairy an "ever-popular Pokémon," though not as much as in the United States as it is in Japan. She added that she did an article for Clefairy solely because of her dislike for Clefable, though stating that it's "cool enough." GamesRadar editor Carolyn Gudmundson compared Clefairy to Jigglypuff, stating that it is far less utilized, in spite of the fact that was initially supposed to be the mascot of the series. She also noted it as a part of an overused Pokémon design, the "huggable pink blob."


== Clefable ==
Clefable (ピクシー, Pikushī, Pixy), known as the Fairy Pokémon, is similar to Clefairy in appearance. It is larger than its pre-evolved form, with prominent ears and a pair of jagged wings on its back. Clefable inhabit remote mountainous areas and generally any environment that has sufficiently little ambient noise. Clefable’s hearing is extremely sensitive – it is said that it can discern the sound of a pin falling 1,100 yards (1,000 m) away, so it is averse to living in areas with sound pollution (compare with Whismur).
Clefable are also extremely timid, and rarely seen in the wild. They avoid all contact with outsiders. Even sensing the presence of others in the area (which is fairly easy thanks to their prodigious hearing) will cause it to run and hide immediately. They will, however, come into the open on quiet, moonlit nights to take a stroll on a lake.
Clefable’s wings are probably not fit for real flight, but they allow it to move in a skipping, bouncy manner as if it were walking on the moon's surface. They can even walk across the water’s surface this way, so when it takes the aforementioned stroll on the lake, it literally takes a stroll on the lake. Clefable’s wings, its hovering walk, its timidity and elusiveness have led them to be categorized as a type of fairy in the Pokémon world.


== Vulpix ==

Vulpix (ロコン, Rokon), known as Fox Pokémon, is a fox-like creature with six curled tails, based on the Japanese fox spirit kitsune. From birth, Vulpix starts out with only one tail, which is white in color; this tail splits apart as it grows and turns red. Most commonly female, Vulpix are especially known for having beautiful fur and tails. Vulpix have a flame in their bodies, which when the temperature outside increases, they let out of their mouths to prevent their body temperature from getting too hot. They can control this fire, and make them fly like will-o-wisps. In the wild, Vulpix will feign injury to escape from more powerful predators. Nintendo decided to give the various Pokémon species "clever and descriptive names" related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences as a means to make the characters more relatable to American children. It was originally going to be named Foxfire in the English versions until Nintendo of America settled with Vulpix, which is based on "vulpus", the Latin word for fox.


== Ninetales ==

Ninetales (キュウコン, Kyūkon, Kyukon), also known as the Fox Pokémon, is a golden-white nine-tailed fox, based on the kitsune, a Japanese fox spirit. The Kyūbi (九尾), which held similar powers such as shapeshifting, were the main inspiration for the Pokémon. Ninetales' name was derived from the number of its tails, nine, and the fact that the idea for it came primarily from ancient Japanese tales. This fox-like Pokémon is covered with a thick, luxurious golden-white fur, with a fluffy crest atop its head and a similar ruff around its neck. Ninetales have gleaming red eyes that are said to give them the power of mind control. Its nine different tails hold strange, cosmic powers, that let it live for 1,000 years, Ninetales are highly intelligent Pokémon that understand human speech. They are very vengeful and have been known to curse those who mistreat them for 1000 years. Many legends surround this Pokémon, one of which stating that Ninetales was born when 9 saints were united and reincarnated as this Pokémon.


== Jigglypuff ==

Jigglypuff (プリン, Purin), known as the Balloon Pokémon, is shaped like a round ball, with pink skin, large blue or green eyes, catlike ears, and a tuft of fur on its forehead. Its skin is rubbery and stretchy. It can inflate its body like a balloon (usually when it becomes angry; this is accompanied by a distinctive "honk" sound), or flatten its body, much like fellow Nintendo character Kirby. An exact limit to the size it can grow to in this manner is unknown. Jigglypuff are characterized by putting their enemies to sleep by singing a lullaby. Before beginning to sing, they mesmerize the opponent with their soft, glowing eyes, and if they inflate themselves, they can sing for longer periods of time. They can easily adjust the wavelength of their voices to that of the brain waves of a sleeping being, allowing for their pleasing melody to put its audience to sleep. They sing without pausing to take a breath, so if the opponent is resistant to sleeping, they potentially run out of air. Game Freak's staff have noted Jigglypuff as both one of their and the public's favorite Pokémon, in terms of both anime and video game appearances.


== Wigglytuff ==
Wigglytuff (プクリン, Pukurin), known as the singing rabbit Pokémon, is a relatively large pink balloon-like Pokémon with a white underbelly, large blue baby-like eyes, a pair of large rabbit ears, and a twisty tuft of pink hair on its forehead. It evolves from Jigglypuff through a Moon Stone. In fact, it's remarkably similar to its pre-evolved form, Jigglypuff, except the ears have grown larger and it now maintains an "oval" shape. Wigglytuff's eyes are always covered by a thin layer of tears, so that if any dust gets into Wigglytuff’s eyes, it is quickly cried away. In the games, Wigglytuff's fur is described to be "sublime", so much so that if two of them come into close contact with each other, they are difficult to separate.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, Wigglytuff is the guild master of the guild that the lead character is a member of.
IGN's Pokémon of the Day Guy wrote that Wigglytuff was both "soft and cuddly". IGN's Pokémon Chick called it a "perky pink Pokémon" and that while Jigglypuff's popularity was "mind-boggling", once it evolves into Wigglytuff, it "has a tendency to sort of slip into the background". She added that it was a "pity" because "this irritable, googly-eyed pastel mercenary is actually pretty cool". Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Thomas East wrote that Wigglytuff's name was amusing and that it could have made his list of the five best Pokémon names. Destructoid's Ashley Davis wrote that cute evolutions such as Wigglytuff do not become as useful as tougher looking ones. Author Joseph Jay Tobin wrote that Wigglytuff was popular among young girls. GamePro‍ '​s Emily Balistrieri called the Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness incarnation of Wigglytuff a "weird, weird Pokémon".


== Zubat ==
Zubat (ズバット, Zubatto), known as the Bat Pokémon, is a small, blue bat-like Pokémon. It has two long, skinny legs. Zubat's face lacks any eyes and a nose. The insides of Zubat's ears and undersides of its wings are purple. Zubat's wings are supported by elongated 'fingers', and four teeth can be discerned from inside its mouth, two on the lower jaw and two on the upper. A female has smaller fangs. Zubat form colonies in dark places like caves, and use ultrasonic waves to identify and approach targets. The waves act as a sonar to check for objects in its way. During the day, it gathers with others and hangs from the ceilings of dark places. It does so because prolonged exposure to the sun causes its body to become slightly burned. While living in pitch-black caverns, their eyes gradually grew shut and deprived them of vision.
Since their appearance in the Pokémon series, Zubat has received generally mixed reception. IGN's Pokémon Chick called the Zubat line her favourite dual-type Pokémon line. IGN's Jack DeVries, Kristine Steimer, and Nick Nolan criticized the abundance of Zubats and Geodude, bemoaning the lack of variety in caves; they added that because of the simple design of Zubat it is easily replaceable. Many sources have compared Zubat to Woobat, and consider it a replacement.


== Golbat ==
Golbat (ゴルバット, Gorubatto), the evolved form of Zubat, is a fierce, nocturnal Pokémon. Unlike Zubat, Golbat has eyes, and its mouth is much larger. It resides in the darkness of caves, and is most active in the pitch black of night, especially if the moon is in its new phase. It is widely known for sucking fresh blood from living things. Once it has found a living target, it attacks in a stealthy manner, often striking without warning from behind. It harshly bites down on its prey with its four sharp fangs, strong enough to puncture the hide of any animal-like Pokémon, however strong the hide might be. It then proceeds to drink ten ounces of blood instantly. Golbat enjoys blood so much that it may not control its feeding. When weighed down with excess blood from overfeeding, it flies clumsily if at all. Once it strikes, it will not stop draining energy from the victim even if it gets too heavy to fly. Like Zubat, the female's fangs are smaller than the male's.
IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that Golbat was "unforgivably ugly" in Red and Blue but has fans. She later used it as an example of an ugly middle evolution. Newsday‍ '​s Eric Holm called it a popular character in Pokémon. Destructoid's Jim Sterling called Golbat "absolutely ridiculous" and that it "barely even qualifies as a bat". He added that he never liked Zubat or Golbat "either from an aesthetic or a gameplay point of view".


== Oddish ==
Oddish (ナゾノクサ, Nazonokusa) is a weed-like Pokémon that looks like a small animated radish plant with a rounded body. Its body is blue or purple with two small feet and red eyes. On top of its head grows a large clump of 5 long green blades of grass. Oddish is a nocturnal Pokémon, using moonlight rather than the sun's rays for photosynthesis. During the day, Oddish avoids the sun's heat and brightness by burying itself into the earth, leaving only the leaves on top of its head visible above ground. In this way it disguises itself as a plant, misdirecting its herbivorous daytime predators. In the night, it goes around sowing its "seeds." While buried, Oddish nourishes itself by absorbing nutrients from the soil using its feet, which are said to temporarily change into a root-like structure for this purpose. Oddish has been known to use its leaves as hands, such as one who used this to climb a rope net and tried to fly like a Hoppip. If anyone pulls at Oddish's leaves and tries to uproot it while it is buried underground, Oddish will react by shrieking in a high-pitched voice. This mirrors the behavior of the legendary mandrake in a similar situation, although it seems that Oddish's squeaks do not have the same dire consequences as a mandrake's.


== Gloom ==
Gloom (クサイハナ, Kusaihana) is a flower-like Pokémon that is a larger and stronger evolution of Oddish. Gloom can also be found in most grassy areas of most regions. The fluid that oozes from its mouth isn't drool; it is a nectar that is used to attract prey. Once the prey is attracted, the nectar will cling to the prey, trapping it. The nectar mostly attracts prey that lack a sense of smell, as the nectar smells so bad that those who have the misfortune of sniffing it suffer from memory loss. As well as its nectar, the pistil of Gloom's flower smells incredibly foul, often described as smelling of old sneakers, garbage, and rotten eggs with a hint of skunk fumes, and strong enough to be smelled from a mile away. It has been found that approximately 1 in 1,000 people enjoy the scent that Gloom emits. Those that don't enjoy the smell have been known to faint upon smelling it. When Gloom is faced with danger, the stench worsens. If it is feeling calm or secure, it does not release the horrible aroma. It is said to widely shower its attacks; with moves such as Stun Spore, Poison Powder, and Sleep Powder, it has the ability to cause status problems on its foes. Gloom has two evolved forms (from the second generation onwards), Vileplume and Bellossom. Unlike other Pokémon that evolve via level, Gloom will not evolve until it is exposed to an evolution stone; a Leaf Stone will make a Vileplume, while a Sun Stone produces a Bellossom.


== Vileplume ==
Vileplume (ラフレシア, Rafureshia, Ruffresia) is a huge flower-like Pokémon that is a larger and stronger evolution of Gloom. Vileplumes can be obtained by using a Leaf Stone on a Gloom. Vileplume is known for its extremely offensive stench that comes from its large red flower. Vileplume uses this stench in battle, catching its foes off guard when they start to back away from the horrible smell. However, Vileplume's flower can actually be a hindrance in battle due to it being very heavy and bulky. Due to its weight, Vileplume walks very slowly, and it often must use its hands to help support the flower. Vileplume can be found in forests and they like to stay low to the ground. When they sleep, their huge petals droop over their head and they blend in more with the plants around them. They also release toxic, dense pollen into the air in this position so animals don't go near them. At night, they sometimes gather together to perform odd rituals – during this time they release toxic pollen to deter intruders. The white markings on this flower are larger in the female than in the male.
Since appearing in the Pokémon series, the Oddish evolutionary line has received generally positive reception. They have been featured in several forms of merchandise, including figures, plush toys, and the Pokémon Trading Card Game. Vileplume was featured as a keychain in a Burger King promotion. A first edition Vileplume card has been noted as being worth up to $75. A Vileplume card was released with a printing mistake.


== Paras ==
Paras (パラス, Parasu) is a basic parasite-like Pokémon that has two mushrooms on its back. Paras can be found in some caves and the Safari Zone in Kanto and in Ilex Forest and the Bug Catching Contest in Johto.
Paras is born with tiny spores covering their body, which grow into tochukaso mushrooms as the Pokémon feeds. It is noted in that the relationship between the host and the mushrooms is a symbiotic relationship: the mushrooms will sap energy from the host, causing the Paras to continuously burrow underground in forest areas to gnaw on tree roots, since the tochukaso draws most of the energy from the roots. In return, the mushrooms defend the host by spraying toxic spores at enemies. The mushrooms themselves have strong healing properties, and are valued for their life extending properties.


== Parasect ==
Parasect (パラセクト, Parasekuto) is a larger and stronger evolution of Paras that has one large mushroom on its back instead of two (see Paras). The mushroom has completely taken over the bug host. Parasect resides in dark and damp places, a preference of the mushroom, not the bug. The mushroom also has numerous medicinal qualities. Parasect can be obtained when a Paras reaches level 24. Parasect can be found in the Cerulean Cave and Safari Zone in Kanto and Silver Cave in Crystal. The Japanese and English names are a portmanteau of the English words "parasite" and "insect". It is deeply related to the mushroom on its back. Parasect is the mushroom's host so in-place the mushroom gives it spores which paralyze its enemy on contact.
IGN listed Parasect as one of the best Bug types, alongside Scyther. While they praise its ability to use status-altering techniques, they bemoaned its lack of Bug attacks, aside from Leech Life.


== Venonat ==
Venonat (コンパン, Konpan, Compoun), known as the Insect Pokémon, is a fairly common, dark purple, gnat-like Pokémon. Venonat has a round body covered in purple fur, which oozes poison. It has a pair of clodhopper feet and stubby forepaws. Venonat has a pincer-like mouth, red compound eyes, and white antennae. Venonat has highly developed eyes, which act as a radar to help find suitable prey. The small bugs it catches and eats appear only at night, so it sleeps in a hole in a tree until night falls. Venonat’s prey and Venonat itself are both attracted by bright light. Venonat live in dense forests with lots of undergrowth and little light. It is most common in Kanto and Johto with occasional sightings in Sinnoh.
Tracey Sketchit has a Venonat which he commonly uses to see things at night with. Koga and Aya of Fuchsia City both have a Venonat. Koga's instantly evolved into a Venomoth in The Ninja Poké-Showdown when it was sent out to battle Ash.
GameDaily ranked Venonat third on their list of the "Top 10 Weirdest Looking Pokémon", stating "Pokémon should be cuddly. Pokémon should have faces with big cheery smiles. They should not resemble bugs with blood-red eyeballs that suggest they carry disease." GamesRadar however praised the character, stating while its appearance would imply worthlessness, to the point that around their offices "Venonat fan" was an insult, its attacks showed otherwise and made it a versatile character. A theory exists that Butterfree and the Pokémon Venonat were once to be related; GamesRadar's Carolyn Gudmundson stated that their faces and hands were identical and looked more similar than Venonat does to its evolution Venomoth. She theorized that the developers may have mixed up the families due to Metapod being so similar to Venomoth. Another GamesRadar editor commented that Venomoth seemed diverged from Venonat.


== Venomoth ==
Venomoth (モルフォン, Morufon, Morphon) is a large, lavender, moth-like Pokémon. It is rare in the wild, but can also be obtained by raising the more common Venonat to level 31. Its wings are covered in extremely toxic, dust-like scales. These scales are color-coded to indicate the effect they will have upon coming into contact with a living creature, darker colours meaning poison, and lighter colours meaning paralysis. Venomoth is similar to Butterfree in that they both flap their wings to release toxic powders. However, Venomoth seems to be the more dangerous of the two, as it is described as scattering its toxins with every flap of its wings. Much like Venonat, Venomoth is nocturnal and feeds upon small insects.


== Diglett ==
Diglett (ディグダ, Diguda, Digda), known as the Mole Pokémon, is a small, brown mole, with what a large pink nose, with its body always halfway in the ground. Diglett live only a few feet underground, and feed on plant roots. It burrows through the ground at a shallow depth, leaving raised earth in its wake, perfect for planting crops. Diglett are frequently kept on farms for this reason. Diglett has very thin skin, and thus if Diglett is exposed to light its blood will heat up, causing it to grow weak. Because of this, Diglett prefer dark places, sticking its head up only when the sun is not bright. Otherwise, it pops up in caves. Diglett make their homes in tunnels and caves under the earth, most of which are made by burrowing Onix.
In Pokémon Stadium, Diglett featured in its own mini game called "Ekans Hoop Hurl", in which players must toss as many Ekans around as many Diglett as they can. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team, the third story mission of the game is to rescue a Diglett from Mt. Steel. Afterwards, Diglett can be found near Pelipper Post Office. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, Diglett is one of the members of Wigglytuff Guild. His primary role is sentry duty, to examine visitors' footprints and say what Pokémon they are.
In the anime, Diglett first appeared in Dig Those Diglett. They were causing trouble for a construction crew that planning on building a dam. The foreman insisted that the Diglett were to be exterminated, but the Pokémon of the trainers that happened to be in the area refused to fight them. The reason was that the Diglett and Dugtrio were helping to plant trees in the forest. Diglett were also used by a man named Poncho in The Underground Round-Up. He used them to dig tunnels underground of a town that was infested with Electrode. The tunnels sent the Electrode to an open field where they'd live in peace. Diglett were also featured in Plant It Now...Diglett Later!, helping villagers with crops and being the apparent target of some thieves. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Diglett makes a cameo in Raging Rhydon as wild Pokémon of Mt. Moon. Red also owns a Diglett that he uses against Eevee.
Considered one of the best Ground-type Pokémon in Red and Blue, Diglett and Dugtrio's appearance has received criticism. IGN's Pokémon Chick criticized Diglett's and Dugtrio's designs, questioning how cute something with a "humongous gauche clown nose" and a lack of a body could be. Destructoid's Jim Sterling called Diglett the "pinnacle of lazy goddamn design", further questioning how much effort went into the character's design during development of the game.


== Dugtrio ==
Dugtrio (ダグトリオ, Dagutorio), known as the Mole Pokémon, consists of three Diglett that merged into one body. They think exactly like each other, and work cooperatively. They trigger earthquakes when they travel underground. They burrow by bobbing their heads up and down separately. They can dig over 60 miles in the hardest ground.
In Pokémon Pinball, Dugtrio appears in a bonus stage that can be accessed by the Red Table. After the player has knocked out a number of Diglett, they must knock out the Dugtrio that appears to in. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Red Rescue Team and Blue Rescue Team, Dugtrio sends the player to Mt. Steel to rescue his son. Dugtrio loves to show off to his son, but often forgets that people can't see him underground. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, Dugtrio is one of the members of the Wigglytuff Guild. He updates the Outlaw Notice Board and Job Bulletin Board with rotating boards. In Super Smash Bros. Brawl a Dugtrio can be seen on the Ground Terrain of the Pokémon Stadium 2 stage, situated next to a large rock.
Dugtrio first appeared in Dig Those Diglett. They worked with Diglett to plant trees in a forest. In The Underground Round Up, Poncho used Diglett and Dugtrio to rid a town of Electrode. Poncho used his Dugtrio to get rid of Team Rocket's Electrode Eliminator. Katie used a Dugtrio against Ash during the Hoenn League in Shocks and Bonds. Katie's Dugtrio defeated Ash's Pikachu and was defeated by Ash's Glalie. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Giovanni owns a Dugtrio which was used to shatter the opening mechanisms on Red's Poké Balls, preventing him from releasing his Pokémon.
Considered one of the best Ground-type Pokémon in Red and Blue, Diglett and Dugtrio's appearance has received criticism. IGN's Pokémon Chick criticized Diglett's and Dugtrio's designs, questioning how cute something with a "humongous gauche clown nose" and a lack of a body could be.


== References ==