Viridiplantae (literally "green plants") are a clade of eukaryotic organisms made up of the green algae, which are primarily aquatic, and the land plants (embryophytes), which evolved within them. They have cells with cellulose in their cell walls, and primary chloroplasts derived from endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria that contain chlorophylls a and b and lack phycobilins. More than 350,000 species of Viridiplantae exist.
In some classification systems, the group has been treated as a kingdom, under various names, e.g. Viridiplantae, Chlorobionta, or simply Plantae, the latter expanding the traditional plant kingdom to include the green algae. Adl et al., who produced a classification for all eukaryotes in 2005, introduced the name Chloroplastida for this group, reflecting the group having primary chloroplasts with green chlorophyll. They rejected the name Viridiplantae on the grounds that some of the species are not plants, as understood traditionally. The Viridiplantae are made up of two clades: Chlorophyta and Streptophyta. Together with Rhodophyta and glaucophytes, Viridiplantae are thought to belong to a larger clade called Archaeplastida or Primoplantae.
A taxonomic evaluation of eukaryotes based on myosin distribution showed the Viridiplantae lost class-I myosins.


== Phylogeny and classification ==


=== Leliaert et al. 2012 ===
Simplified phylogeny of the Viridiplantae, according to Leliaert et al. 2012.
Viridiplantae

Chlorophyta

core chlorophytes

Ulvophyceae

Cladophorales
Dasycladales
Bryopsidales
Trentepohliales
Ulvales-Ulotrichales
Oltmannsiellopsidales

Chlorophyceae

Oedogoniales
Chaetophorales
Chaetopeltidales
Chlamydomonadales
Sphaeropleales

Trebouxiophyceae

Chlorellales
Oocystaceae
Microthamniales
Trebouxiales
Prasiola clade

Chlorodendrophyceae
Pedinophyceae 

prasinophytes (paraphyletic)

Pyramimonadales
Mamiellophyceae
Pycnococcaceae
Nephroselmidophyceae
Prasinococcales
Palmophyllales

Streptophyta

Charophyta

Mesostigmatophyceae
Chlorokybophyceae
Klebsormidiophyceae
Charophyceae
Zygnematophyceae
Coleochaetophyceae

Embryophyta (land plants)

Cladogram


== See also ==
Green algae
Chlorophyta
Plants
Angiosperm


== References ==