The auricle or auricula is the visible part of the ear that resides outside of the head. It is also called the pinna (Latin for wing / fin, plural pinnae), a term that is used more in zootomy.


== StructureEdit ==
The diagram shows the shape and location of most of these components:
Anthelix (antihelix) forms a 'Y' shape where the upper parts are:
Superior crus (to the left of the fossa triangularis in the diagram)
Inferior crus (to the right of the fossa triangularis in the diagram)

Antitragus is below the tragus
Aperture is the entrance to the ear canal
Auricular sulcus is the depression behind the ear next to the head
Concha is the hollow next to the ear canal
Conchal angle is the angle that the back of the concha makes with the side of the head
Crus of the helix is just above the tragus
Cymba conchae is the narrowest end of the concha
External auditory meatus is the ear canal
Fossa triangularis is the depression in the fork of the antihelix
Helix is the folded over outside edge of the ear
Incisura anterior auris, or intertragic incisure, or intertragal notch, is the space between the tragus and antitragus
Lobe (lobule) - attached or free according to a classic single-gene dominance relationship
Scapha, the depression or groove between the helix and the anthelix
Tragus


=== DevelopmentEdit ===
The developing auricle is first noticeable around the sixth week of gestation in the human fetus, developing from the auricular hillocks, which are derived from the first and second pharyngeal arches. These hillocks develop into the folds of the auricle and gradually shift upwards and backwards to their final position on the head. En route accessory auricles (also known as preauricular tags) may be left behind. The first three hillocks are derived from the 1st branchial arch and form the tragus, crus of the helix, and helix, respectively. Cutaneous sensation to these areas is via the trigeminal nerve, the attendant nerve of the 1st branchial arch. The final three hillocks are derived from the second branchial arch and form the antihelix, antitragus, and lobule, respectively. These portions of the ear are supplied by the cervical plexus and a small portion by the facial nerve. This explains why vesicles are classically seen on the auricle in herpes infections of the facial nerve (Ramsay Hunt syndrome type II). 


== FunctionEdit ==
The auricle functions to collect sound and transform it to directional and other information. The auricle collects sound and acting as a funnel amplifies this and directs it to the auditory canal.The filtering effect of the human pinna preferentially selects sounds in the frequency range of human speech.


=== AmplificationEdit ===

Amplification of sound by the pinna, tympanic membrane and middle ear causes an increase in level of about 10 to 15 dB in a frequency range of 1.5 kHz to 7 kHz. This amplification is an important factor in inner ear trauma resulting from elevated sound levels.


=== Notch of pinnaEdit ===
Due to its anatomy, the pinna largely eliminates a small segment of the frequency spectrum; this band is called the pinna notch. The pinna works differently for low and high frequency sounds. For low frequencies, it behaves similarly to a reflector dish, directing sounds toward the ear canal. For high frequencies, however, its value is thought to be more sophisticated. While some of the sounds that enter the ear travel directly to the canal, others reflect off the contours of the pinna first: these enter the ear canal after a very slight delay. This delay causes phase cancellation, virtually eliminating the frequency component whose wave period is twice the delay period. Neighboring frequencies also drop significantly. In the affected frequency band – the pinna notch – the pinna creates a band-stop or notch filtering effect.


== Other animalsEdit ==

In animals the function of the pinna is to collect sound, and perform spectral transformations to incoming sounds which enable the process of vertical localization to take place. It collects sound by acting as a funnel, amplifying the sound and directing it to the auditory canal. While reflecting from the pinna, sound also goes through a filtering process, as well as frequency dependent amplitude modulation which adds directional information to the sound (see sound localization, vertical sound localization, head-related transfer function, pinna notch). In various species, the pinna can also signal mood and radiate heat.


== Clinical significanceEdit ==
There are various visible ear abnormalities:
traumatic injury
infection
wart, mole, birthmark
scars, including keloids
cyst
skin tag
sunburn, frostbite
pressure ulcer, often from a poorly fitting hearing aid
anotia, absent pinna
microtia, underdeveloped pinna
cryptotia, a pinna covered beneath the skin of the scalp
Stahl’s deformity, pointed pinna due to an extra fold of cartilage
cupped or constricted ear deformity, a hooded superior helix
preauricular pit
preauricular tag
Darwin's tubercle, protuberance on the anterior helix
hypertrichosis, including hypertrichosis lanuginosa acquisita, a hairy pinna
cauliflower ear, post-traumatic cartilage deformity
tophus, nodule on the pinna related to gout
chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis (Winkler's nodule), a nodule initiated by solar damage
actinic keratosis and cutaneous horn, premalignant lesions caused by solar damage
benign and malignant neoplasm, including tumors, keratoacanthoma, carcinoma


== Additional imagesEdit ==


== See alsoEdit ==

Earrings for pierced ears
Ear stapling


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
drtbalu otolaryngology online
 Media related to Auricles (anatomy) at Wikimedia Commons