Tuf Voyaging is a 1986 science fiction fix-up novel by George R. R. Martin, first published in hardcover by Baen Books. It is a darkly comic meditation on environmentalism and absolute power. Martin cited fantasy fiction and science fiction Grand Master Jack Vance as having a large influence on his Haviland Tuf stories, Martin going so far as trying to emulate Vance's writing style in most of them.
This novel is a collection of related short fiction works, originally published over several years, beginning with 1976's "A Beast for Norn." The book includes a prologue and Martin's S'uthlam story line (published in Analog), adding them as bridging material, and gathering them with other Tuf stories into one episodic novel.
The novel concerns the (mis)adventures of Haviland Tuf, an exceptionally tall, bald, very pale, overweight, phlegmatic, vegetarian, cat-loving but otherwise solitary space trader. Due to the venality and cutthroat tactics of the party chartering his one-man trading vessel, Tuf inadvertently becomes master of Ark, an ancient, 30-kilometer-long "seedship", a very powerful warship with advanced ecological engineering capabilities. Tuf travels the galaxy, offering his services to worlds with environmental problems, and sometimes imposing solutions of his own.
Tuf Voyaging is set in the same fictional universe as several of Martin's other works, including "With Morning Comes Mistfall", A Song for Lya, and Dying of the Light.


== Contents ==
"The Plague Star" (1985)
"Loaves and Fishes" (1985)
"Guardians" (1981)
"Second Helpings" (1985)
"A Beast for Norn" (1976)
"Call Him Moses" (1978)
"Manna From Heaven" (1985)


== The Plague Star ==
The story begins with four people requiring transport: Celise Waan, a scholar of anthropology; Jefri Lion, a scholar and retired soldier; Annitas, a half-robotic cybertech; and Kaj Nevis, the leader of the expedition. They hire Rica Dawnstar, a mercenary bodyguard, and acquire the services of Haviland Tuf, a not very successful trader.
Their destination is a so-called "plague star", known to inflict disease and pestilence on every third generation of a small, remote world. It turns out to be a nearly-derelict seedship of the long-defunct Federal Empire's Ecological Engineering Corps, created to have the ability to rewrite genetic coding. Tuf's ship, the Cornucopia of Excellent Goods at Low Prices, is damaged by the seedship's automated defenses, and three of the occupants, Nevis, Anittas, and Dawnstar, board the seedship by means of pressure suits, leaving the others to die. However, Tuf reveals he has a microchip allowing he, Waan, and Lion, the ones left on the Cornucopia, to land their craft on the seedship. Nevis, who has taken control of a bulky but extremely powerful exoskeleton found on the Cornucopia, forces Anittas, a cyborg, to invade the ship's circuits. Alarmed by this brutality and worried he will use his suit's power to subjugate her as well, Dawnstar runs away from Nevis, ultimately finding the control room. Anittas, meanwhile, betrays Nevis, releasing several of the ship's bioweapons, including acid-spitting 'hellkittens', hyperaggressive carnivorous batlike creatures, spiderlike, unimaginably sharp edged organisms known only as 'walking webs', and a T. Rex. Furious at his treachery, Nevis kills Anittas. Meanwhile, Waan, Lion, and Tuf have found the armory, but have split up due to disagreements on leadership. They quickly discover that the air is poisoned with various plagues, which kill one of Tuf's cats. He clones it back using the ship's equipment, naming it Chaos. Waan is found by the hellkittens, which spray her with acid and corrode her helmet, impairing her vision. She is forced to take her helmet off. Unfortunately, she catches a plague, and when the hell kittens return, she is not only weakened by illness but unprotected by her helmet. She manages to destroy the hellkittens, but dies in the process after her vision goes and she is eaten by them. Lion, meanwhile, sets a trap for Nevis by rigging a plasma cannon to only go off when objects of certain dimensions cross them, which would be triggered by Nevis's suit. However, while luring Nevis, he is attacked by the batlike creature, which melts his face off. Nevis is cornered and killed soon afterward by the walking web. Rica Dawnstar, in charge of the control room, attempts to kill Tuf by attacking him with the T. Rex, but her plan backfires when the plasma cannon is triggered by the T. Rex, killing her and the dinosaur. Tuf takes control of the seedship, being the only living contender.


== Loaves and Fishes ==
Haviland Tuf takes his newly acquired ship, the Ark, to the world of S'uthlam (an anagram for Malthus) for repairs. S'uthlam is a world on the verge of war with all of the nearby inhabited worlds. S'uthlam requires ever-increasing resources due to the world's ever-worsening population explosion, which is in turn due to the perverse and violently aggressive S'uthlamese religious belief in the godliness of unrestricted human reproduction regardless of the fact that it must lead, as it had in the recent past, to famine and/or S'uthlamese attempts at military conquest.
Due to this, the S'uthlam authorities want the Ark for themselves as both a resource to wring higher calorie production from their star system's biology and as a powerful weapon of war. In an attempt to secure it, Portmaster Tolly Mune kidnaps one of Tuf's cats. She makes a bet with Tuf - if he will solve S'uthlam's impending famine, she will return his cat and give him monetary credits for the ship's repairs. If he loses the bet, S'uthlam will keep the seedship.
Tuf at first reasonably proposes that the S'uthlamese simply restrict their incontinent reproductive practices, but because the S'uthlamese fixation is religious, it is impervious to reason. They will not control their population growth, and thus drive obsessively into a suicidal future of starvation and war.
Tuf works on the problem, and manages to find a solution whereby he uses the seedship's capabilities to provide exotic plants and animals which can yield sustenance for the population. The authorities, with striking proof of the Ark's capabilities, now begin scheming to bring it in their possession. Tolly Mune, disgusted with the politics of the situation, assists Tuf in escaping from S'uthlam, although he informs her that he will return to pay off his debt.


== Guardians ==
Tuf finds himself at Namor, an oceanic world where sea monsters are attacking the local population. As always, he offers to assist for a fee. The people of Namor grow more desperate and impatient, especially as monsters able to walk on land begin to appear. Tuf's hand is forced, and he unleashes a barrage of other creatures to directly counteract the monsters.
This strategy, initially successful, soon stops working as the monsters gain resistance against these other-worldly creatures. Tuf goes back to work, and manages to find a solution. Through his psionically-enhanced cat, he discovers a previously-unsuspected sapient species native to Namor: the mudpots, sessile aquatic bottom-dwellers (which had hitherto been considered dietary delicacies by the Namorian colonists) linked telepathically into a kind of hivemind, controlling the lesser species of life on the planet as skilled bio-engineers.
Tuf establishes communications with the mudpots and brokers a peace agreement whereby his human employers agree to cease eating the planet's autochthonous intelligent species. He gives the leaders of Namor psionically-enhanced kittens to facilitate their dealings with the mudpots, and departs.


== Second Helpings ==
Tuf returns to S'uthlam to pay the first part of his debt. He is hailed as a hero due to the advancements in food supply, now known as "Tuf's Flowering." This is also due to Tuf and Mune, a highly inaccurate, overly-dramatized movie about Tuf's first adventure on S'uthlam, which Mune encouraged so as to build public support for Tuf's plan (and save her political skin from the fallout of helping Tuf escape with Ark).
However, paradoxically, the overpopulation crisis has become even worse due to the S'uthlamese people's over-optimistic response to Tuf's Flowering, increasing their reproduction rates. Tuf works on trying to provide even more-efficient crops and animals. He also insists on delivering a planet-wide speech detailing the enhancements he had in mind for S'uthlam and concluding with an explicit admonition.

The only true and permanent solution is to be found not aboard my Ark, but in the minds and loins of each individual S'uthlamese citizen. You must practice restraint and implement immediate birth control. You must stop your indiscriminate procreation at once!

This is received with predictable religious outrage, and Tolly Mune is barely able to extract Tuf from the clutches of an angry S'uthlamese mob.


== A Beast for Norn ==
Tuf is approached by Herold Norn, Senior Beastmaster of the Norn House of Lyronica. The House of Norn requests beasts for gladiatorial fighting in Lyronica's Bronze Arena. After seeing an example of the Arena battles (and, it is strongly implied, being appalled by its barbarity), Tuf agrees to provide a breeding stock of cobalcats (and a stock of innocuous-looking prey animals from the cobalcats' homeworld to be released into the cobalcats' new Lyronican habitat) for the House of Norn.
As the House of Norn racks up victories with their cobalcats, Tuf is approached seriatim by the other houses for ever-more-lethally effective beasts (and compatible prey animals), until the greatest of the Houses at last approaches him for a beast and also with a proposal for him to cease all further dealings with the Houses of Lyronica. Tuf graciously accepts the offer.
Herold Norn returns to Tuf to complain about Norn's cobalcats not mating (and about the prey species reproducing without effective suppression and overrunning the Norn lands, making it impossible for the House of Norn to return to breeding their original Arena beasts). Tuf gets the last laugh, as the introduction of the various prey species into each House's territory irrevocably changes the regional ecosystem such that all become incapable of sustaining the large predators upon which the gladiatorial contests had originally depended, thus leading to the (unstated) end of the Bronze Arena.


== Call Him Moses ==
While peaceably eating in a restaurant, Tuf is attacked by Jaime Kreen. Kreen is convicted for the attack and bonded to Tuf as a servant in debt. Kreen explains that his society (a technologically advanced secondary colony established as an arcology on the planet Charity) has been taken over by a primitivist religious leader named Moses. Taking his cues from the Bible, Moses had unleashed plagues on the inhabitants of the arcology, driving them out of their city into the countryside to labor and suffer under Moses' back-to-nature Holy Altruistic Restoration.
Kreen had attempted to murder Tuf because he blames Moses' plagues upon Tuf, who has gained an interstellar reputation as an ecological engineer, and Tuf realizes that Moses' "plagues" (actually low-tech simulations easily imposed by sabotage upon the closed system of an arcology) offer him an opportunity for revenue.
Kreen is sent down to the planet to bring back the former leaders of the now-conquered and evacuated arcology for negotiations, and Tuf offers to help them against Moses for a hefty fee. Using the Ark's technology, Tuf introduces himself to Moses as God, in the guise of a pillar of fire. He afflicts the followers of Moses with the bibilical plagues of legend, but these are widespread planetary ecological assaults instead of Moses' fraudulent localized afflictions.
After two such attacks, Tuf invites Moses aboard the Ark and shows him simulations of the increasingly horrible plagues that he could further inflict upon Moses and his followers. Moses, frightened, gives up his claim on the arcology's population, allowing them to escape his nasty, brutish religious fanaticism and return to the comforts of modern civilization.


== Manna from Heaven ==
Tuf returns to S'uthlam for the third time to pay off the last of his debt. This time, S'uthlam is on the brink of war with the allied forces of the neighbouring worlds. Tolly Mune, now First Councillor, comes aboard the Ark to discuss with Tuf the possibility of acquiring the seedship for S'uthlam's own purposes.
S'uthlam's population problem remains, worse than ever, as Tuf's innovations from his previous visit were not maximally used. Its society is beginning to break down and either war or social collapse seems likely. Tuf labors to find a solution, and calls a meeting of all the worlds about to clash. He presents to them his solution: an edible, mildly addictive plant called "manna", which will freely grow everywhere on S'uthlam and eliminate its hunger problems. After some arm-twisting in which Tuf threatens to use the military might of his seedship against anyone who refuses, the hostile worlds agree to an armistice. Tuf later tells a horrified Tolly Mune that the manna will feed her people, but will also inhibit the libidos of the S'uthlamese and cause widespread, but not universal, sterilization. He leaves Mune to make a momentous decision for S'uthlam; it is implied that she accepts the provision of manna to forestall war and famine.


== Character development ==
In the beginning of the novel Tuf is an unassuming and rather inept interstellar trader, of humble and somewhat bland (on the surface) nature, an aversion to human contact, and a love of cats. As the story progresses, Tuf's character is revealed to be that of Piper's self-reliant man, as the power of the Ark allows him to solve the apparently intractable problems of several worlds. Tolly Mune, in explaining why she was helping him escape with the Ark in the first of the S'uthlam stories, says that "Power corrupts..., and absolute power corrupts absolutely" (an uncredited quotation of the ancient dictum by Lord Acton). Mune further says that she doesn't think that there is such a thing as an incorruptible man, but if there is, Tuf is it. She also says that she wouldn't trust the leaders of her world with the potentially terrible biowarfare capabilities of Ark.
Eventually this becomes a grim prediction. Finding that most of his clients' problems arise not primarily from true ecological catastrophes but rather as the result of their cupidity, stupidity, bureaucracy, religious fanaticism, and obstinate bloody-mindedness, he resolves their situations by addressing their failings, beginning (1976) with rendering it impossible for the Great Houses of Lyronica to continue the gladitorial animal contests of the Bronze Arena ("A Beast for Norn").
On Namor he finds a solution: seeking out contact with the previously unsuspected native sapient race that had escaped the "fighting guild" of unthinkingly truculent Guardians to end the attacks being inflicted upon the human colonists by the planet's mudpot hivemind. On Charity he copes with both the incompetence of the arcology's administrators ("[Y]ou are by training a bureaucrat", says Tuf to Jaime Kreen, "and thus good for virtually nothing") and the religious tyranny of Moses' Holy Altruistic Restoration.
Finally, in "Manna from Heaven" (1985), he provides the S'uthlamese and their enemies with a solution that simultaneously averts both famine and war but covertly imposes birth control upon the "religious crazies" of S'uthlam's Church of Life Evolving (characterized as "anti-entropists, kiddie-culters, helix-humpers, genepool puddlers"), forcing Tolly Mune to accept Tuf's induced population implosion as the only alternative to social breakdown and genocide.


== Possible sequel ==
In a February 2013 post, Martin wrote on his website that, from time to time, he is asked by fans about writing more Tuf stories; he continued, saying that he hopes to do so again someday. He also hinted that he thought Irish actor Conleth Hill, who plays Varys on HBO's Game of Thrones, based on his bestselling A Song of Ice and Fire fantasy series, would be a good choice to play Tuf for a pay cable TV series.


== Publishing history ==
1986, February - Baen Books, hardcover edition, ISBN 0-671-55985-0
1987, March - Baen Books, trade paperback edition, ISBN 0-671-65624-4
1990, February - Baen Books, mass-market paperback, ISBN 978-5-551-74032-2
2003, November - Meisha Merlin Publishing, illustrated hardcover 2nd edition, ISBN 1-59222-004-5
2003, August - Meisha Merlin Publishing, illustrated trade paperback 2nd edition, ISBN 1-59222-005-3
2003, November - Meisha Merlin Publishing, 52 signed and lettered (A-Z/AA-ZZ) editions, ISBN 1-59222-015-0
2003, November - Meisha Merlin Publishing, 448 signed and numbered slipcased editions, ISBN 1-59222-016-9
2013, January - Bantam Spectra, trade paperback edition, ISBN 0-34553-799-8
2013, March - Gollancz, Amazon Kindle edition, ASIN: B009SS9632


== References ==