The concept of once-a-month cooking (OAMC) is to spend a set time cooking with an end result of having enough meals to last through the whole month. OAMC recipes usually involve freezing the meals until needed (termed freezer cooking). This has increased in popularity over the past few years in response to the global recession. Several websites now provide OAMC tips and tricks.


== Advantages ==
The primary advantage to this method of cooking is to save time over the course of the month by preparing meals ahead of time in one big cooking day. Preparation time for each meal is then cut down to reheating time only.
This method also allows the home cook to save money by purchasing food items in bulk and taking advantage of sales at the market. Money is also saved on the family budget by having homemade convenience foods which can cut down on the frequency of fast food purchases or home dinner deliveries.
Cooking ahead for the freezer can be a healthier alternative to purchasing prepackaged frozen meals at the grocery store, allowing the cook to choose wholesome ingredients and cater to individual food needs (allergies, sensitivities, etc.).


== See also ==
Frozen food


== References ==


== External links ==
Quick tips from Once A Month Cooking, excerpt at Penguin Books Australia
"Once-a-month cooking saves cash".  at Bankrate.com
"Meals for a month".  on Home & Garden Television (HGTV)
"50 ways to save money".  on Canadian Television
PhillipsDeseret, Valerie (2003). "Frozen assets: Here's another solution for the 5 p.m. dinner panic". Deseret News. at Deseret News
"Freezer Pleasers". in Cooking Light magazine
"Make-ahead meal recipes". in Omaha World-Herald
"Meatball Mania!". on Dr. Laura
"Save on Your Grocery Bill". on CBN.com
"Author, cook to hold workshop".  in Auburn-Reporter


== Further reading ==
Jody Allen (2014) Once a Month Cooking, Penguin, ISBN 9780143799689
Deborah Taylor-Hough (2009) Frozen Assets: Cook for a Day, Eat for a Month, SourceBooks, ISBN 1402218591
Mary Beth Lagerborg, Mimi Wilson (2007) Once-a-Month Cooking, St. Martin's Griffin, ISBN 0312366256
Susie Martinez, Bonnie Garcia (2005) Don't Panic - Dinner's in the Freezer, Revell, ISBN 0800730550
Freezer Cooking at Stay At Home Mum