This is a list of countries and dependencies ranked by human population density and measured by the number of human inhabitants per square kilometer or square mile.


== MethodologyEdit ==
The list includes sovereign states and self-governing dependent territories based upon the ISO standard ISO 3166-1. The list also includes but does not rank unrecognized but de facto independent countries. The figures in the following table are based on areas including inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers).
Figures used in this article are mainly based on the latest censuses and official estimates (or projections). Where there is not such updated national data available, figures are based on the 2012 estimates provided by the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.


== Main tableEdit ==
The names of dependent territories as well as recognized states with no or limited control over their territory are shown in italics.

Area figures given here are taken from various (usually unspecified) sources.
The European Union is a sui generis supranational union possessing "country-like" characteristics. The entity is composed of 28 member countries. Its population density has been estimated at 116 people per km², and it would be ranked 95th if it were included in the list. (population: 506,913,394 on January 1, 2014, area: 4,324,782 km2). See also: List of regional organizations by population.
The most densely populated sovereign nation is Monaco, with a population density of 18,900 people/km2.
Area includes land and water.


== Secondary tableEdit ==
This list consists of the one hundred most populous countries. (see also List of countries by population).


== See alsoEdit ==
Excel Tables - United Nations World Population Prospects, the 2012 Revision
List of countries by real population density (based on food growing capacity)
By region:
Population density of Asian countries
List of African countries by population density
List of North American countries by population density
List of South American countries by population density
List of the European Union members by density
Area and population of European countries
Population density of countries in Oceania
Cities:
List of cities by population density
List of the most densely populated administrative units in the world
Other
List of population concern organizations


== NotesEdit ==