In the seven-layer OSI model of computer networking, the physical layer or layer 1 is the first (lowest) layer. The implementation of this layer is often termed PHY.
The physical layer consists of the basic networking hardware transmission technologies of a network. It is a fundamental layer underlying the logical data structures of the higher level functions in a network. Due to the plethora of available hardware technologies with widely varying characteristics, this is perhaps the most complex layer in the OSI architecture.
The physical layer defines the means of transmitting raw bits rather than logical data packets over a physical link connecting network nodes. The bit stream may be grouped into code words or symbols and converted to a physical signal that is transmitted over a hardware transmission medium. The physical layer provides an electrical, mechanical, and procedural interface to the transmission medium. The shapes and properties of the electrical connectors, the frequencies to broadcast on, the modulation scheme to use and similar low-level parameters, are specified here.
Within the semantics of the OSI network architecture, the physical layer translates logical communications requests from the data link layer into hardware-specific operations to affect transmission or reception of electronic signals.


== Physical signaling sublayerEdit ==
In a local area network (LAN) or a metropolitan area network (MAN) using open systems interconnection (OSI) architecture, the physical signaling sublayer is the portion of the physical layer that:
interfaces with the data link layer's media access control (MAC) sublayer,
performs character encoding, transmission, reception and decoding and,
performs galvanic isolation.


== List of servicesEdit ==
The major functions and services performed by the physical layer are:
Bit-by-bit or symbol-by-symbol delivery
Providing a standardized interface to physical transmission media, including
Mechanical specification of electrical connectors and cables, for example maximum cable length
Electrical specification of transmission line signal level and impedance
Radio interface, including electromagnetic spectrum frequency allocation and specification of signal strength, analog bandwidth, etc.
Specifications for IR over optical fiber or a wireless IR communication link

Modulation
Line coding
Bit synchronization in synchronous serial communication
Start-stop signalling and flow control in asynchronous serial communication
Circuit switching
Multiplexing
Establishment and termination of circuit switched connections

Carrier sense and collision detection utilized by some level 2 multiple access protocols
Equalization filtering, training sequences, pulse shaping and other signal processing of physical signals
Forward error correction for example bitwise convolutional coding
Bit-interleaving and other channel coding
The physical layer is also concerned with
Bit rate
Point-to-point, multipoint or point-to-multipoint line configuration
Physical network topology, for example bus, ring, mesh or star network
Serial or parallel communication
Simplex, half duplex or full duplex transmission mode
Autonegotiation


== List of protocolsEdit ==
ARINC 818 Avionics Digital Video Bus
Bluetooth physical layer
CAN bus (controller area network) physical layer
DSL
EIA RS-232, EIA-422, EIA-423, RS-449, RS-485
Etherloop
Ethernet physical layer Including 10BASE-T, 10BASE2, 10BASE5, 100BASE-TX, 100BASE-FX, 100BASE-T, 1000BASE-T, 1000BASE-SX and other varieties
GSM Um air interface physical layer
G.hn/G.9960 physical layer
IEEE 1394 interface
ISDN
IRDA physical layer
ITU Recommendations: see ITU-T
Mobile Industry Processor Interface physical layer
Optical Transport Network (OTN)
SONET/SDH
T1 and other T-carrier links, and E1 and other E-carrier links
TransferJet physical layer
USB physical layer
Telephone network modems- V.92
Varieties of 802.11 Wi-Fi physical layers


== Hardware equipment (network node) examplesEdit ==
Network adapter
Repeater
Network hub
Modem
Fiber Media Converter


== Relation to TCP/IP modelEdit ==
The TCP/IP model, defined in RFC 1122 and RFC 1123, is a high-level networking description used for the Internet and similar networks. It does not define an equivalent layer that deals exclusively with hardware-level specifications and interfaces, as this model does not concern itself directly with physical interfaces. Several RFCs mention a physical layer and data link layer, but that is in context of IEEE protocols. RFC 1122 and 1123 do not mention any physical layer functionality or physical layer standards.


== See alsoEdit ==
Clock recovery
Ethernet physical layer
Data transmission
Digital communication
Digital modulation
Line code
Pulse shaping
Bit synchronization
Channel model


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Gorry Fairhurst (2001-01-01). "Physical Layer". Archived from the original on 2009-06-08. 
Physical Layer (Layer 1)
10G Layer 1 Walkthrough