Prestonwood Town Center is a 62-acre (250,000 m2) retail shopping center located at the northeast corner of Beltline Road and Montfort Drive in Dallas, Texas. It opened in 2006. Major tenants include Barnes & Noble, Office Depot, and Wal-Mart. A Circuit City location closed in 2009 as part of the economic collapse of that retail chain. However, in 2010, it was converted to a Best Buy.


== HistoryEdit ==
The current center occupies the site of a shopping mall that was also officially named Prestonwood Town Center, but which was informally known in the area as Prestonwood Mall. The two-level mall opened in 1979 featuring anchor stores Neiman Marcus, Lord & Taylor, JCPenney, Joske's (later Dillard's), and Montgomery Ward. (Wards closed in November 1984 and was replaced by Mervyns in April 1985.) The mall featured a central ice skating rink that was used after hours by area hockey leagues.
In 1982, Galleria Dallas opened nearby with anchor stores Macy's, Marshall Field's, and Saks Fifth Avenue. The next year, Bloomingdale's opened at nearby Valley View Center. The competition and the reputation of being a notorious teen hangout hurt Prestonwood, but it remained near full occupancy into the 1990s.
Renovations planned in 1996 never materialized. Then the anchors began exiting. In September 1997, citing slow sales, JCPenney closed its store, followed shortly by Mervyns. By 1999, Neiman Marcus and Lord & Taylor were the only two tenants remaining there, and they had already announced plans to relocate to The Shops at Willow Bend, a new mall in nearby Plano.
Archon Group bought the mall in 2000 to turn it into a telecommunication center called "Genisus Dallas North." After extensive remodeling and only partial usage, that failed too, and by October 2003, Archon dropped its plans for Genisus and announced that they would demolish the mall structure and replace it with an open-air retail shopping center. By summer 2004, it had been completely demolished.


== Former featuresEdit ==


=== DART Transit CenterEdit ===
In 1985, Dallas Area Rapid Transit opened a major bus transfer station on a street bordering the Prestonwood Town Center parking lot. Mall officials warned commuters that this was not a park and ride facility and that their cars would be towed. This dispute lasted for several years but by 1988 a compromise had been worked out to use a limited parking area for park and ride commuters. Disputes between the transit agency and mall management closed the park and ride lot for a time in the mid-1990s but it eventually reopened. In 1999 this facility was closed and operations were transferred to the purpose-built Addison Transit Center nearby.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Archon Group: Prestonwood Town Center
Prestonwood Town Center Site Plan
Dead Malls: Prestonwood Town Center
Prestonwood Mall Clock