The China University of Petroleum (simplified Chinese: 中国石油大学; traditional Chinese: 中國石油大學; pinyin: Zhōngguó Shíyóu Dàxué) is a university system in China. It consists of two universities: China University of Petroleum (East China), located in Qingdao and Dongying, and China University of Petroleum (Beijing), located in Beijing. Both are regarded as the best universities in the field of petroleum related subjects in China. They are placed under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education.


== History ==
The university, founded in 1953, was known then as Beijing Petroleum Institute. It was founded acquiring the best petroleum associated departments in the country:
Petroleum research groups in Department of Geology, Department of Mining and Department of Chemical Engineering from Tsinghua University
Petroleum research groups in four departments of Peiyang University (now Tianjin University)
Part of Department of Chemical Engineering from Peking University
Part of Department of Mathematics from Yanching University (now merged into Peking University)
Some students and faculty from fluid fuel research group in Department of Chemical Engineering from Dalian Institute of Technology (now Dalian University of Technology)
Some students and faculty in Department of Mining and Department of Chemical Engineering from Northwestern Polytechnical Institute (now Northwest Polytechnical University)
It moved to Dongying, Shandong Province in 1969, with name changed to Huadong Petroleum Institute. In 1988, it was renamed The University of Petroleum consisting of one part in Dongying as the college and one in Beijing as the graduate school. Each gradually developed into universities with both undergraduate and graduate students. In January 2005, its name changed to China University of Petroleum. In 2004, China University of Petroleum (East China) began to move to Qingdao, and completed the relocation in 2012. Dongying campus currently serves as the base for continuing education, remote education, research laboratories, and industry collaboration.
China University of Petroleum specializes in upstream, midstream and downstream petroleum science and engineering, in the overall level of domestic lead. Its five national key specialties are:
Chemical Engineering and Technology
Mineral Resources Prospecting and Exploration
Oil and Gas Well Engineering
Oil and Gas Storage and Transportation Engineering
Oil and Gas Field Development Engineering


== Campus ==
China University of Petroleum -Beijing is located in Beijing, the capital city of China. It also has a campus in Qingdao, which is named as China University of Petroleum- East China.


== Notable alumni ==
The alumni of CUP include the top officials of China, CEOs of major oil companies, members of Chinese Academy of Sciences, and members of Chinese Academy of Engineering, etc. The most famous alumni are,
Wu Yi - former Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China, Politburo member
Zhou Yongkang - former Politburo Standing Committee member, Secretary of the Central Politics and Law Commission


== References ==


== External links ==
China University of Petroleum
China University of Petroleum (simplified Chinese)
China University of Petroleum, Beijing
China University of Petroleum, Beijing (simplified Chinese)
China University of Petroleum (Archive)
China University of Petroleum, Beijing (Archive)