Joanne (alternate spellings Joann, Jo Ann, Johann, Johanne, Jo-Ann, Jo-Anne) is a common given name for females, being a variant of Joanna, the feminine form of John; derived from the Latin name Johanna with the meaning in Hebrew of "God is gracious". In Northern Ireland of 1975, "Joanne" was the most frequently used name for female newborns, though by the early years of the 21st Century, the name had declined in popularity so that it could not be counted among the twenty most frequently used.
Sometimes in modern English Joanne is reinterpreted as a compound of the two names Jo and Anne, and therefore given a spelling like JoAnne, Jo-Anne, or Jo Anne. However, the original name Joanna in ancient Greek and Latin is a single unit, not a compound. The names Hannah, Anna, Anne, Ann are etymologically related to Joanne just the same: they are derived from Hebrew חַנָּה Ḥannāh 'grace' from the same verbal root meaning 'to be gracious'.
In the United Kingdom, its popularity peaked during the 1970s, when it was frequently among the 10 most popular female names. However, by the 1980s it had fallen out of the top 10 and by 1994 it wasn't even in the top 100.


== People with the given name Joanne ==
Joanne Accom, pop singer from Melbourne, Australia
Joanne Banning, Australian field hockey player
Joanne Brackeen, American jazz pianist
Joanne Campbell, British actress
Joanne Colan, video blogger
Joanne Deakins, British backstroke swimmer
Joanne Doyle, Irish dancer with Riverdance
Joanne Dru, American actress
Joanne Durant, Barbadian track and field sprinter
Joanne Ellis, English field hockey player
Joanne Fluke, American mystery novelist
Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta, singer Lady Gaga
Joanne Harris, British novelist
Jo Hayes, New Zealand politician
Joanne Herring, American political activist
Joanne Kelly, Canadian actress
Johann Lamont, Scottish politician
J. K. Rowling, British author, whose given name is Joanne Rowling
Joanne Pavey, British Olympian and distance runner
Joanne Peh, Singaporean actress
Joanne Shenandoah, singer and acoustic guitarist
Joanne Whalley, British actress
Joanne Woodward, American actress, Academy Award winner in 1957, for The Three Faces of Eve; Wife of Paul Newman, American Actor
Jo Anne Worley, American actress


== Songs containing references to 'Joanne' ==
"Joanne" by Michael Nesmith & The First National Band


== Companies ==
Jo-Ann Stores, a specialty retailer of crafts and fabrics in the United States
Joanne's Bed and Back, a retailer of specialty furniture in the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
"Joanna" at Edgar's Name Pages - with history, naming frequency statistics, related names, and famous namebearers
Icons of St. Joanna the Myrrh-Bearer here and here