This list of birds of Connecticut is a comprehensive listing of all the bird species recorded from the U.S. state of Connecticut. This list is based on a checklist used by the Avian Records Committee of Connecticut, the list used by most birders to objectively evaluate species recorded in the state. This list is based on the committee's revision from 2007.
A total of 417 species of birds have been recorded in Connecticut. This number includes all bird species known to have occurred in the state, including birds that don't breed in Connecticut, such as migrants, winter visitors and vagrants, as well as breeding species and recently extinct and extirpated species. There are about 280 species regularly occurring in the state. The Atlas of Breeding Birds of Connecticut (1994) listed 173 bird species as confirmed breeders, based on a 1982–1986 survey. An assessment before 2004 estimated the total number of species breeding regularly in the state at about 150.
The taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families, genera and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) used in the accompanying bird lists adhere to the conventions of the AOU's (1998) Check-list of North American Birds, the recognized scientific authority on the taxonomy and nomenclature of North American birds. The AOU's Committee on Classification and Nomenclature, the body responsible for maintaining and updating the Check-list, "strongly and unanimously continues to endorse the biological species concept (BSC), in which species are considered to be genetically cohesive groups of populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups" (AOU 1998). See Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy for an alternative phylogenetic arrangement based on DNA-DNA hybridization.
The following codes are used to designate some species:
(I) Introduced - a species introduced to North America as a consequence, direct or indirect, of human actions
(X) Extinct - a species that no longer exists
(E) Extirpated - a species that no longer occurs in Connecticut although populations exist elsewhere
(S) - sight record only


== Ducks, geese and swans ==
Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae
The family Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, bills which are flattened to a greater or lesser extent, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to special oils.
Ross's goose, Chen rossii (R)
Brant, Branta bernicla
Barnacle goose, Branta leucopsis (R)
Cackling goose, Branta hutchinsii
Canada goose, Branta canadensis
Mute swan, Cygnus olor (I)
Wood duck, Aix sponsa
Gadwall, Anas strepera
Eurasian wigeon, Anas penelope
American wigeon, Anas americana
American black duck, Anas rubripes
Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos
Blue-winged teal, Anas discors
Cinnamon teal, Anas cyanoptera (R)
Northern shoveler, Anas clypeata
Northern pintail, Anas acuta
Green-winged teal, Anas crecca
Canvasback, Aythya valisineria
Redhead, Aythya americana
Ring-necked duck, Aythya collaris
Tufted duck, Aythya fuligula (R)
Greater scaup, Aythya marila
Lesser scaup, Aythya affinis
King eider, Somateria spectabilis
Common eider, Somateria mollissima
Harlequin duck, Histrionicus histrionicus
Surf scoter, Melanitta perspicillata
White-winged scoter, Melanitta fusca
Black scoter, Melanitta americana
Long-tailed duck, Clangula hyemalis
Bufflehead, Bucephala albeola
Labrador duck, Camptorhynchus labradorius (X)
Barrow's goldeneye, Bucephala islandica
Common goldeneye, Bucephala clangula
Hooded merganser, Lophodytes cucullatus
Common merganser, Mergus merganser
Red-breasted merganser, Mergus serrator
Ruddy duck, Oxyura jamaicensis


== Pheasants, turkeys and grouse ==

Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae
Phasianidae consists of the pheasants and their allies. These are terrestrial species, variable in size but generally plump with broad relatively short wings. Many species are gamebirds or have been domesticated as a food source for humans. In Connecticut, one species has been introduced. Turkeys have a distinctive fleshy wattle that hangs from the underside of the beak and a fleshy protuberance that hangs from the top of its beak called a snood. As with many galliform species, the female (the hen) is smaller and much less colorful than the male (the tom). With wingspans of 1.5–1.8 meters (almost 6 feet), the turkeys are the largest birds in the open forests in which they live and are rarely mistaken for any other species. One species has been recorded in Connecticut. Grouse inhabit temperate and subarctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere. They are game and are sometimes hunted for food. In all Connecticut species, males are polygamous and have elaborate courtship displays. These heavily built birds have legs feathered to the toes. Most species are year-round residents and do not migrate. Two species have been recorded in Connecticut.
Ring-necked pheasant, Phasianus colchicus (I)
Wild turkey, Meleagris gallopavo
Ruffed grouse, Bonasa umbellus
Greater prairie-chicken, Tympanuchus cupido (EX) (S)


== New World quail ==
Order: Galliformes   Family: Odontophoridae
The New World quails are small, plump terrestrial birds only distantly related to the quails of the Old World, but named for their similar appearance and habits. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Northern bobwhite, Colinus virginianus


== Loons ==

Order: Gaviiformes   Family: Gaviidae
Loons are aquatic birds, the size of a large duck, to which they are unrelated. Their plumage is largely gray or black, and they have spear-shaped bills. Loons swim well and fly adequately, but are almost hopeless on land, because their legs are placed towards the rear of the body. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Red-throated loon, Gavia stellata — rather common, mostly along the coast and at the mouths of major rivers during spring and fall migration; uncommon in winter and at that time found mostly in eastern Long Island Sound; as many as 100 to 200 individuals gather together in November; many go south by early winter.
Pacific loon, Gavia pacifica (R)
Common loon, Gavia immer — historically, the bird rarely nests in Connecticut and no recent nesting was observed up to 2004 in the state; rather common in spring and fall during migration; found in coastal waters, large lakes and reservoirs; most likely to be seen in eastern Long Island Sound; pollution (particularly acidified lakes which cut back on food resources and mercury poisoning) has cut the population in the northeast, along with fluctuating reservoir levels and lakeshore residential development.


== Grebes ==

Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land. In Connecticut, five species have been recorded.
Pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps — a rare breeder found in freshwater marshes, marshy ponds and lakes in the western part of the state; an uncommon spring and fall migrant and then found on coastal and inland waters
Horned grebe, Podiceps auritus — numerous spring and fall migrant, although not always; seen less in winter, usually along the coast and sometimes inland on large lakes and rivers
Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena — uncommon in spring and fall migration season, rare in winter; usually found along the coast, sometimes on inland bodies of water
Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis (R)
Western grebe, Aechmorphorus occidentalis (R)


== Fulmars, petrels and shearwaters ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae
The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterized by united nostrils with medium septum and a long outer functional primary. In Connecticut, seven species have been recorded.

Northern fulmar, Fulmarus glacialis (R)
Black-capped petrel, Pterodroma hasitata (R)
Cory's shearwater, Calonectris diomedea (R)
Great shearwater, Puffinus gravis (R)
Sooty shearwater, Puffinus griseus (R)
Manx shearwater, Puffinus puffinus (R)(S)
Audubon's shearwater, Puffinus lherminieri (R)(S)


== Storm-petrels ==

Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae
The storm-petrels are the smallest seabirds, relatives of the petrels, feeding on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. The flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Wilson's storm-petrel, Oceanites oceanicus — rarely found in the state, but seen rather regularly in eastern Long Island during the summer.
White-faced storm-petrel, Pelagodroma marina (R)
Leach's storm-petrel, Oceanodroma leucorhoa (R)


== Boobies and gannets ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium-large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Northern gannet, Morus bassanus (formerly Sula bassana) — rarely found during spring and fall migration, and seldom seen in winter, although regularly present in December, mostly in eastern Long Island Sound.
Brown booby, Sula leucogaster


== Pelicans ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae
Pelicans are very large water birds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. Like other birds in the order Pelecaniformes, they have four webbed toes. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
American white pelican, Pelecanus erythrorhynchos
Brown pelican, Pelecanus occidentalis (R)


== Cormorants ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Cormorants are medium-to-large aquatic birds, usually with mainly dark plumage and areas of colored skin on the face. The bill is long, thin and sharply hooked. Their feet are four-toed and webbed, a distinguishing feature among the Pelecaniformes order. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Double-crested cormorant, Phalacrocorax auritus — now a common from spring to fall, this bird was a rare migrant around 1900; much less common in winter, but sightings are increasing; mostly found on some coastal islands, but also on major rivers and some inland lakes; by the late 1990s, there were at least 1,000 nesting pairs in the state; these birds compete with fishermen and with less robust species, so efforts have been made in New York and southern New England to cut down the population; in the years leading up to 2004, the birds were less seen in the summer than previously.
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo — rather common along the coast from fall through spring, but also found on the Connecticut river and other large bodies of water.


== Darters ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Anhingidae
Darters are cormorant-like water birds with very long necks and long, straight beaks. They are fish eaters which often swim with only their neck above the water. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Anhinga, Anhinga anhinga (S) (R)


== Frigatebirds ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Fregatidae
Frigatebirds are large seabirds usually found over tropical oceans. They are large, black or black-and-white, with long wings and deeply forked tails. The males have colored inflatable throat pouches. They do not swim or walk and cannot take off from a flat surface. Having the largest wingspan-to-body-weight ratio of any bird, they are essentially aerial, able to stay aloft for more than a week. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Magnificent frigatebird, Fregata magnificens (R)


== Bitterns, herons and egrets ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the herons, egrets and bitterns. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more secretive. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills.egrets, including the great egret, were decimated in the past by plume hunters, but numbers recovered when given protection in the 20th century. In Connecticut, 11 species have been recorded.
American bittern, Botaurus lentiginosus — uncommon but widespread and found at any time of the year; mostly found in large marshes in summer or winter, and migrants may use small marshes; numbers likely declined when the common reed displaced cattail marshes
Least bittern, Ixobrychus exilis — rarely seen; found in spring through fall in large marshes; prefers marshes roughly equally mixed between vegetation and open water
Great blue heron, Ardea herodias — common in marshes and other bodies of water from spring through fall; numbers have been increasing in recent decades; increasingly seen in winter, but still uncommon then
Great egret, Ardea alba — rather common along the coast from spring through fall and rarely in early winter; less commonly found inland; groups of about 100 pairs nest on Great Captain Island off Greenwich, Charles Island off Milford and Dyuck Island at Westbrook; numbers have been increasing
Snowy egret, Egretta thula — rather common along the coast from spring through fall; can be found roosting at night with great egrets and cormorants; found in woody vegetation on coastal islands, including Great Captain Island off Greenwich, Charles Island off Milford and Dyuck Island at Westbrook; the population on Long Island Sound (including New York state) declined a bit from 1,650 pairs in 1977 to 1,390 in 1998.
Little blue heron, Egretta caerulea — not common, seen from spring through early fall, but most often from mid- to late summer and early in the fall when young birds enter the state from the south; found nesting in woody areas of coastal islands, including Great Captain Island off Greenwich and Charles Island off Milford; the nesting range expanded to the north along the East Coast in the 20th century
Tricolored heron, Egretta tricolor — seldom found in the state; seen in coastal waters in the spring and summer, occasionally nested in the woody areas of the Norwalk Islands; in the mid 20th century the species became more abundant in New York and southern New England
Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis — rarely seen; found in coastal waters in spring and summer; has been seen regularly nesting in the woody areas of the Norwalk Islands; a native of the Old World, the egret showed up in the 1880s, first in South America and by the 1940s had spread north to Florida and then along the East Coast
Green heron, Butorides virescens — rather common; found in marshes and swamps from spring through fall; loss of marshes and damage to them likely caused a decline in this population in the 20th century
Black-crowned night-heron, Nycticorax nycticorax — rather common on the coast and on the Connecticut river from spring through fall; rarely found in winter; spreads inland along the Connecticut and Housatonic rivers in late summer; nests on coastal islands, including Great Captain Island off Greenwich, Charles Island off Milford and Dyuck Island at Westbrook; the population in the state was about 500 pairs as of 2004; numbers declined in the Northeast United States in the 20th century, probably because of human disturbances and pesticide use; the Long Island Sound population (including New York state) declined from 2,400 pairs in 1977 to 1,390 in 1998
Yellow-crowned night-heron, Nyctanassa violacea— rarely seen; found in coastal marshes from spring through early fall, usually in the western part of the state


== Ibises and spoonbills ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
The family Threskiornithidae includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings. Their bodies tend to be elongated, the neck more so, with rather long legs. The bill is also long, decurved in the case of the ibises, straight and distinctively flattened in the spoonbills. In Connecticut, three species have occurred.
American white ibis, Eudocimus albus (R)
Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus
White-faced ibis, Plegadis chihi (R)


== Storks ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, heavy, long-legged, long-necked wading birds with long stout bills and wide wingspans. They lack the powder down that other wading birds such as herons, spoonbills and ibises use to clean off fish slime. Storks lack a pharynx and are mute. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Wood stork, Mycteria americana (R)


== New World vultures ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Cathartidae
The New World vultures are not closely related to Old World vultures, but superficially resemble them because of convergent evolution. Like the Old World vultures, they are scavengers. However, unlike Old World vultures, which find carcasses by sight, New World vultures have a good sense of smell with which they locate carcasses. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Black vulture, Coragyps atratus
Turkey vulture, Cathartes aura


== Osprey ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Pandionidae
The osprey is a medium-large fish-eating bird of prey or raptor. It is widely distributed because it tolerates a wide variety of habitats, nesting in any location which is near a body of water and provides an adequate food supply. It is the only member of its family.
Osprey, Pandion haliaetus — The distinctive black and white birds are common in the state from spring through fall; seen mostly on platforms on the east and central coastline; also called "fish hawks".migrations are heaviest in early to mid-spring (around St. Patrick's Day) and late summer through early fall (around Labor Day), with most juveniles migrating a bit later.
feeds on medium-size fish, including flounders, which they catch by diving from the air, feet first; the birds are unique in Connecticut as the only species with a fish-only diet, and they are one of the few raptors that prey on live fish; they can be seen hovering over the water before splashing down, sometimes 2 or 3 feet in the water; the birds can catch up to 10 fish a day; adults feed their fledglings for up to 8 weeks; ospreys have been known to snatch goldfish from ornamental fish ponds.
Formerly the bird was rare, in part due to pesticide contamination (including DDT), with just nine nests in the state as of 1974 and increasing to 162 (with 315 fledglings) by 1999; their range has expanded westward along the coast over time and up the Connecticut and Quinnipiac rivers; their nests stay intact through the winter, when the birds migrate as far as South America; in the 1990s, raccoon predation may have kept the population down at great Island on the Connecticut river before barriers were put on the poles supporting nests; when raccoons were more scarce, ospreys successfully nested on the ground, but they typically build nests at the highest possible locations, including cell phone towers.
In May 2008, the Maritime Aquarium at Norwalk set up a webcam of an osprey nest on Manressa Island, a peninsula on the west side of Norwalk Harbor, near a power plant. (A link to the webcam can be found at this Web page.) The tan color of the chicks makes them a bit difficult to see against the similarly colored nest on the black-and-white webcam feed. The aquarium monitors ospreys "because, as a predator, at the top of the food chain, osprey are an important indicator of the health of the entire ecosystem," according to the aquarium website.


== Hawks, kites and eagles ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Accipitridae
Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey, which includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have very large powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight. In Connecticut, 13 species have been recorded.

Swallow-tailed kite, Elanoides forficatus
Mississippi kite, Ictinia mississippiensis
Bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus
Northern harrier, Circus cyaneus
Sharp-shinned hawk, Accipiter striatus
Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii
Northern goshawk, Accipiter gentilis
Red-shouldered hawk, Buteo lineatus
Broad-winged hawk, Buteo platypterus
Swainson's hawk, Buteo swainsoni (R)
Red-tailed hawk, Buteo jamaicensis
Rough-legged hawk, Buteo lagopus
Golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos


== Caracaras and falcons ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey, notably the falcons and caracaras. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons. In Connecticut, four species have been recorded.
American kestrel, Falco sparverius
Merlin, Falco columbarius
Gyrfalcon, Falco rusticolus (R)
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus


== Rails, gallinules and coots ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae
Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. The most typical family members occupy dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes which are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers. In Connecticut, nine species have been recorded.

Yellow rail, Coturnicops noveboracensis (R)
Black rail, Laterallus jamaicensis (R)
Corn crake, Crex crex (R)
Clapper rail, Rallus crepitans
King rail, Rallus elegans
Virginia rail, Rallus limicola
Sora, Porzana carolina
Purple gallinule, Porphyrio martinica (R)
Common gallinule, Gallinula galeata
American coot, Fulica americana


== Cranes ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae
Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances". In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Sandhill crane, Grus canadensis


== Lapwings and plovers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae
The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water. In Connecticut, seven species have been recorded.
Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola
American golden-plover, Pluvialis dominica
Snowy plover, Charadrius nivosus (R)
Wilson's plover, Charadrius wilsonia (R)
Semipalmated plover, Charadrius semipalmatus
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus
Killdeer, Charadrius vociferus


== Oystercatchers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Haematopodidae
The oystercatchers are large, obvious and noisy plover-like birds, with strong bills used for smashing or prying open molluscs. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
American oystercatcher, Haematopus palliatus


== Stilts and avocets ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Black-necked stilt, Himantopus mexicanus (R)
American avocet, Recurvirostra americana


== Sandpipers and allies ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae
Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Different lengths of legs and bills enable multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. In Connecticut, 38 species have been recorded.
Spotted sandpiper, Actitis macularius
Solitary sandpiper, Tringa solitaria
Spotted redshank, Tringa erythropus (R)
Greater yellowlegs, Tringa melanoleuca
Lesser yellowlegs, Tringa flavipes
Willet, Tringa semipalmata
Upland sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda
Eskimo curlew, Numenius borealis (X)
Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus
Long-billed curlew, Numenius americanus(R)
Black-tailed godwit, Limosa limosa (R)
Hudsonian godwit, Limosa haemastica
Bar-tailed godwit, Limosa lapponica (R)
Marbled godwit, Limosa fedoa
Ruddy turnstone, Arenaria interpres
Red knot, Calidris canutus
Sanderling, Calidris alba
Semipalmated sandpiper, Calidris pusilla
Western sandpiper, Calidris mauri
Red-necked stint, Calidris ruficollis (R)
Least sandpiper, Calidris minutilla
White-rumped sandpiper, Calidris fuscicollis
Baird's sandpiper, Calidris bairdii
Pectoral sandpiper, Calidris melanotos
Sharp-tailed sandpiper, Calidris acuminata(R)
Purple sandpiper, Calidris maritima
Dunlin, Calidris alpina
Curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea(R)
Stilt sandpiper, Calidris himantopus
Buff-breasted sandpiper, Tryngites subruficollis
Ruff, Philomachus pugnax (R)
Short-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus griseus
Long-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus scolopaceus
Wilson's snipe, Gallinago delicata
American woodcock, Scolopax minor
Wilson's phalarope, Phalaropus tricolor
Red-necked phalarope, Phalaropus lobatus
Red phalarope, Phalaropus fulicarius (R)


== Gulls, terns and skimmers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae
Gulls are typically medium to large birds, usually gray or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have longish bills and webbed feet. The large species take up to four years to attain full adult plumage, but two years is typical for small gulls. terns are in general medium to large birds, typically with gray or white plumage, often with black markings on the head. They have longish bills and webbed feet. They are lighter bodied and more streamlined than gulls, and look elegant in flight with long tails and long narrow wings. skimmers are tropical and subtropical species. They have an elongated lower mandible. They feed by flying low over the water surface with the lower mandible skimming the water for small fish.

Laughing gull, Leucophaeus atricilla
Franklin's gull, Leucophaeus pipixcan (R)
Little gull, Hydrocoloeus minutus
Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus
Bonaparte's gull, Chroicocephalus philadelphia
Black-tailed gull, Larus crassirostris
Mew gull, Larus canus (R, S)
Ring-billed gull, Larus delawarensis
Herring gull, Larus argentatus
Thayer's gull, Larus thayeri (R) (S)
Iceland gull, Larus glaucoides
Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus
Glaucous gull, Larus hyperboreus
Great black-backed gull, Larus marinus
Sabine's gull, Xema sabini (R)
Black-legged kittiwake, Rissa tridactyla
Ross's gull, Rhodostethia rosea (R)
Sooty tern, Onychoprion fuscata (R)
Bridled tern, Onychoprion anaethetus (R)
Least tern, Sternula antillarum
Gull-billed tern, Gelochelidon nilotica (R)(S)
Caspian tern, Hydroprogne caspia
Black tern, Chlidonias niger
White-winged tern, Sterna leucopterus
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii
Common tern, Sterna hirundo
Arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea (R)
Forster's tern, Sterna forsteri
Royal tern, Thalasseus maxima (R)
Sandwich tern, Thalasseus sandvicensis
Black tern, Chlidonias niger
Black skimmer, Rynchops niger


== Skuas ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae

They are in general medium to large birds, typically with gray or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They have longish bills with hooked tips and webbed feet with sharp claws. They look like large dark gulls, but have a fleshy cere above the upper mandible. They are strong, acrobatic fliers. three species have been recorded in Connecticut.
Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus (R)(S)
Parasitic jaeger, Stercorarius parasiticus
Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus(R)


== Auks, murres and puffins ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Alcidae
Alcids are superficially similar to penguins due to their black-and-white colors, their upright posture and some of their habits; however, they are only distantly related to the penguins and are able to fly. Auks live on the open sea, only deliberately coming ashore to nest. In Connecticut, five species have been recorded.
Dovekie, Alle alle (R)
Thick-billed murre, Uria lomvia (R)
Razorbill, Alca torda (S)
Black guillemot, Cepphus grylle (R)
Atlantic puffin, Fratercula arctica (R)


== Pigeons and doves ==

Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere. In Connecticut, seven species have been recorded.
Rock dove, Columba livia (R)(I)
Band-tailed pigeon, Patagioenas fasciata (R)(S)
Eurasian collared-dove, Streptopelia decaocto (R)
White-winged dove, Zenaida asiatica (R)(S)
Mourning dove, Zenaida macroura
Passenger pigeon, Ectopistes migratorius (E)
Common ground-dove, Columbina passerina


== Lories, parakeets, macaws and parrots ==
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittacidae
Parrots are small to large birds with a characteristic curved beak. Their upper mandibles have slight mobility in the joint with the skull and they have a generally erect stance. All parrots are zygodactyl, having the four toes on each foot placed two at the front and two to the back. In Connecticut, one exotic species has been recorded.
Monk parakeet, Myiopsitta monachus (I)


== Cuckoos, roadrunners and anis ==
Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae

The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. The Old World cuckoos are brood parasites. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Yellow-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus
Black-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus erythropthalmus


== Barn owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae
Barn owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Barn owl, Tyto alba


== Typical owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae

Typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk. In Connecticut, 11 species have been recorded.
Eastern screech-owl, Megascops asio
Great horned owl, Bubo virginianus
Snowy owl, Bubo scandiacus
Northern hawk owl, Surnia ulula (R)
Burrowing owl, Athene cunicularia (R)
Barred owl, Strix varia
Great gray owl, Strix nebulosa (R)
Long-eared owl, Asio otus
Short-eared owl, Asio flammeus
Boreal owl, Aegolius funereus (R)
Northern saw-whet owl, Aegolius acadicus


== Nightjars ==
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae

Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet which are of little use for walking and long, pointed wings. Their soft plumage is cryptically colored to resemble bark or leaves. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Common nighthawk, Chordeiles minor
Chuck-will's-widow, Antrostomus carolinensis (R)
Eastern whip-poor-will, Antrostomus vociferus


== Swifts ==
Order: Apodiformes   Family: Apodidae
The swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Chimney swift, Chaetura pelagica


== Hummingbirds ==
Order: Apodiformes   Family: Trochilidae

Hummingbirds are small birds capable of hovering in mid-air due to the rapid flapping of their wings. They are the only birds that can fly backwards. In Connecticut, four species have been recorded.
Ruby-throated hummingbird, Archilochus colubris
Black-chinned hummingbird, Archilochus alexandri
Calliope hummingbird, Selasphorus calliope (R)
Rufous hummingbird, Selasphorus rufus


== Kingfishers ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Cerylidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Belted kingfisher, Megaceryle alcyon


== Woodpeckers, sapsuckers and flickers ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae

Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks. In Connecticut, eight species have been recorded.
Red-headed woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus
Red-bellied woodpecker, Melanerpes carolinus
Yellow-bellied sapsucker, Sphyrapicus varius
Downy woodpecker, Picoides pubescens
Hairy woodpecker, Picoides villosus
Black-backed woodpecker, Picoides arcticus (R)
Northern flicker, Colaptes auratus
Pileated woodpecker, Dryocopus pileatus


== Tyrant flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Tyrannidae

Tyrant flycatchers are passerine birds which occur throughout North and South America. They superficially resemble the Old World flycatchers, but are more robust and have stronger bills. They do not have the sophisticated vocal capabilities of the songbirds. Most, but not all, are rather plain. As the name implies, most are insectivorous. In Connecticut, 17 species have been recorded.
Olive-sided flycatcher, Contopus cooperi
Eastern wood-pewee, Contopus virens
Yellow-bellied flycatcher, Empidonax flaviventris
Acadian flycatcher, Empidonax virescens
Alder flycatcher, Empidonax alnorum
Willow flycatcher, Empidonax traillii
Least flycatcher, Empidonax minimus
Eastern phoebe, Sayornis phoebe
Say's phoebe, Sayornis saya (R)
Ash-throated flycatcher, Myiarchus cinerascens (R)
Great crested flycatcher, Myiarchus crinitus
Tropical kingbird, Tyrannus melancholicus (R)
Western kingbird, Tyrannus verticalis
Eastern kingbird, Tyrannus tyrannus
Gray kingbird, Tyrannus dominicensis (R)
Scissor-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus forficatus (R)
Fork-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus savana (R)


== Shrikes ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus (R)
Northern shrike, Lanius excubitor


== Vireos ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vireonidae
The vireos are a group of small to medium-sized passerine birds restricted to the New World. They are typically greenish in color and resemble the wood warblers except for their heavier bills. In Connecticut, seven species have been recorded.

White-eyed vireo, Vireo griseus
Bell's vireo, Vireo bellii (R)
Yellow-throated vireo, Vireo flavifrons
Blue-headed vireo, Vireo solitarius
Warbling vireo, Vireo gilvus
Philadelphia vireo, Vireo philadelphicus
Red-eyed vireo, Vireo olivaceus


== Jays, crows, magpies and ravens ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae
The Corvidae family includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence. In Connecticut, four species have been recorded.
Blue jay, Cyanocitta cristata
American crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos
Fish crow, Corvus ossifragus
Common raven, Corvus corax


== Larks ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris


== Swallows and martins ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae

The Hirundinidae family is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking and the front toes are partially joined at the base. In Connecticut, seven species have been recorded.
Purple martin, Progne subis
Tree swallow, Tachycineta bicolor
Northern rough-winged swallow, Stelgidopteryx serripennis
Bank swallow, Riparia riparia
Cliff swallow, Petrochelidon pyrrhonota
Cave swallow, Petrochelidon fulva
Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica


== Chickadees and titmice ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae
The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet including seeds and insects. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Boreal chickadee, Poecile hudsonicus (R)
Black-capped chickadee, Poecile atricapilla
Tufted titmouse, Baeolophus bicolor


== Nuthatches ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae
Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike other birds which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Red-breasted nuthatch, Sitta canadensis
White-breasted nuthatch, Sitta carolinensis
Brown-headed nuthatch, Sitta pusilla


== Treecreepers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae
Treecreepers are small woodland birds, brown above and white below. They have thin pointed down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Brown creeper, Certhia americana


== Wrens ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae

Wrens are small and inconspicuous birds, except for their loud songs. They have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous. In Connecticut, five species have been recorded.
Carolina wren, Thryothorus ludovicianus
House wren, Troglodytes aedon
Winter wren, Troglodytes hiemalis
Sedge wren, Cistothorus platensis
Marsh wren, Cistothorus palustris


== Kinglets ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae
The kinglets are a family of birds which are very small insectivorous birds in the genus Regulus. The adults have colored crowns, giving rise to their name. In Connecticut, two species have been recorded.
Golden-crowned kinglet, Regulus satrapa
Ruby-crowned kinglet, Regulus calendula


== Gnatcatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Polioptilidae
These dainty birds resemble Old World warblers in their structure and habits, moving restlessly through foliage while seeking insects. The gnatcatchers are mainly a soft bluish gray in color and have the long sharp bill typical of an insectivore. Many species have distinctive black head patterns (especially males) and long, regularly cocked black-and-white tails. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Blue-gray gnatcatcher, Polioptila caerulea


== Old World flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe (R)


== Thrushes ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly but not exclusively in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs. In Connecticut, 11 species have been recorded.
Eastern bluebird, Sialia sialis
Mountain bluebird, Sialia currucoides (R)
Townsend's solitaire, Myadestes townsendi (R)
Veery, Catharus fuscescens
Gray-cheeked thrush, Catharus minimus
Bicknell's thrush, Catharus bicknelli (R)
Swainson's thrush, Catharus ustulatus
Hermit thrush, Catharus guttatus
Wood thrush, Hylocichla mustelina
American robin, Turdus migratorius
Varied thrush, Ixoreus naevius (R)


== Mockingbirds and thrashers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Mimidae
The mimids are a family of passerine birds which includes thrashers, mockingbirds, tremblers and the New World catbirds. These birds are notable for their vocalization, especially their remarkable ability to mimic a wide variety of birds and other sounds heard outdoors. The species tend towards dull grays and browns in their appearance. In Connecticut, three species have been recorded.
Gray catbird, Dumetella carolinensis
Northern mockingbird, Mimus polyglottos
Brown thrasher, Toxostoma rufum


== Starlings ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small to medium-sized Old World passerine birds with strong feet. Their flight is strong and direct and most are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country, and they eat insects and fruit. The plumage of several species is dark with a metallic sheen. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris (I)


== Wagtails and pipits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
American pipit, Anthus rubescens


== Waxwings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Bombycillidae
The waxwings are a group of birds with soft silky plumage and unique red tips to some of the wing feathers. In the Bohemian and cedar waxwings, these tips look like sealing wax and give the group its name. These are arboreal birds of northern forests. They live on insects in summer and berries in winter. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
Cedar waxwing, Bombycilla cedrorum
Bohemian waxwing, Bombycilla garrulus (R)


== Longspurs and snow buntings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae
Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus
Smith's longspur, Calcarius pictus (R)
Chestnut-collared longspur, Calcarius ornatus (R)
Snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis


== Wood warblers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Parulidae
The wood warblers are a group of small, often colorful passerine birds restricted to the New World. Most are arboreal, but some are more terrestrial, such as the Ovenbird. Most members of this family are insectivores. In Connecticut, 39 species have been recorded.
Blue-winged warbler, Vermivora cyanoptera
Golden-winged warbler, Vermivora chrysoptera
Tennessee warbler, Oreothlypis peregrina
Orange-crowned warbler, Oreothlypis celata
Nashville warbler, Oreothlypis ruficapilla
Northern parula, Setophaga americana
Yellow warbler, Setophaga petechia
Chestnut-sided warbler, Setophaga pensylvanica
Magnolia warbler, Setophaga magnolia
Cape May warbler, Setophaga tigrina
Black-throated blue warbler, Setophaga caerulescens
Yellow-rumped warbler, Setophaga coronata
Black-throated gray warbler, Setophaga nigrescens (R)
Black-throated green warbler, Setophaga virens
Hermit warbler, Setophaga occidentalis (S)(R)
Blackburnian warbler, Setophaga fusca
Yellow-throated warbler, Setophaga dominica
Pine warbler, Setophaga pinus
Prairie warbler, Setophaga discolor
Palm warbler, Setophaga palmarum
Bay-breasted warbler, Setophaga castanea
Blackpoll warbler, Setophaga striata
Cerulean warbler, Setophaga cerulea
Hooded warbler, Setophaga citrina
American redstart, Setophaga ruticilla
Black-and-white warbler, Mniotilta varia
Prothonotary warbler, Protonotaria citrea
Worm-eating warbler, Helmitheros vermivorum
Ovenbird, Seiurus aurocapilla
Northern waterthrush, Parkesia noveboracensis
Louisiana waterthrush, Parkesia motacilla
Connecticut warbler, Oporornis agilis
Kentucky warbler, Geothlypis formosa
Mourning warbler, Geothlypis philadelphia
MacGillivray's warbler, Geothlypis tolmiei (R)
Common yellowthroat, Geothlypis trichas
Wilson's warbler, Cardellina pusilla
Canada warbler, Cardellina canadensis
Yellow-breasted chat, Icteria virens


== American sparrows, towhees, juncos, and buntings ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae
Emberizidae is a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. In Europe, most species are called buntings. In North America, most of the species in this family are known as sparrows, but these birds are not closely related to the Old World sparrows which are in the family Passeridae. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns. In Connecticut, have been recorded.
Green-tailed towhee, Pipilo chlorurus (R)
Spotted towhee, Pipilo maculatus (R)
Eastern towhee, Pipilo erythrophthalmus
American tree sparrow, Spizelloides arborea
Chipping sparrow, Spizella passerina
Clay-colored sparrow, Spizella pallida
Field sparrow, Spizella pusilla
Vesper sparrow, Pooecetes gramineus
Lark sparrow, Chondestes grammacus
Lark bunting, Calamospiza melanocorys (R)
Savannah sparrow, Passerculus sandwichensis
Grasshopper sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum
Henslow's sparrow, Ammodramus henslowii (R)
Le Conte's sparrow, Ammodramus leconteii (R)
Nelson's sparrow, Ammodramus nelsoni
Saltmarsh sparrow, Ammodramus caudacutus
Seaside sparrow, Ammodramus maritimus
Fox sparrow, Passerella iliaca
Song sparrow, Melospiza melodia
Lincoln's sparrow, Melospiza lincolnii
Swamp sparrow, Melospiza georgiana
White-throated sparrow, Zonotrichia albicollis
Harris's sparrow, Zonotrichia querula (R)
White-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia leucophrys
Golden-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia atricapilla (R)
Dark-eyed junco, Junco hyemalis


== Cardinals, saltators and grosbeaks ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cardinalidae
The cardinals are a family of robust, seed-eating birds with strong bills. They are typically associated with open woodland. The sexes usually have distinct plumages. In Connecticut, species have been recorded.
Summer tanager, Piranga rubra
Scarlet tanager, Piranga olivacea
Western tanager, Piranga ludoviciana (R)
Northern cardinal, Cardinalis cardinalis
Rose-breasted grosbeak, Pheucticus ludovicianus
Black-headed grosbeak, Pheucticus melanocephalus (R)
Blue grosbeak, Passerina caerulea
Lazuli bunting, Passerina amoena (R)
Indigo bunting, Passerina cyanea
Painted bunting, Passerina ciris (R)
Dickcissel, Spiza americana


== Blackbirds, meadowlarks, cowbirds, grackles and orioles ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Icteridae
The icterids are a group of small to medium-sized, often colorful passerine birds restricted to the New World and include the grackles, New World blackbirds and New World orioles. Most species have black as a predominant plumage color, often enlivened by yellow, orange or red. In Connecticut, 12 species have been recorded.

Bobolink, Dolichonyx oryzivorus
Red-winged blackbird, Agelaius phoeniceus
Eastern meadowlark, Sturnella magna
Yellow-headed blackbird, Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus
Rusty blackbird, Euphagus carolinus
Brewer's blackbird, Euphagus cyanocephalus (R)(S)
Common grackle, Quiscalus quiscula
Boat-tailed grackle, Quiscalus major (S)
Brown-headed cowbird, Molothrus ater
Orchard oriole, Icterus spurius
Bullock's oriole, Icterus bullockii (R)
Baltimore oriole, Icterus galbula


== Finches ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae

Finches are seed-eating passerine birds that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well. In Connecticut, ten species have been recorded.
Brambling, Fringilla montifringilla (R)
Pine grosbeak, Pinicola enucleator
Purple finch, Haemorhous purpureus
House finch, Haemorhous mexicanus
Red crossbill, Loxia curvirostra
White-winged crossbill, Loxia leucoptera
Common redpoll, Acanthis flammea
Pine siskin, Spinus pinus
American goldfinch, Spinus tristis
Evening grosbeak, Coccothraustes vespertinus


== Old World sparrows ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae
Old World sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small plump brownish or grayish birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects. In Connecticut, one species has been recorded.
House sparrow, Passer domesticus (I)


== See also ==
Fauna of Connecticut
Flora of Connecticut
List of birds
List of mammals of Connecticut
List of North American birds
Lists of birds by region
Long Island Sound for an extensive list of various species


== References ==

"ABA Checklist". American birding Association. Retrieved 2008-03-08. 
"Check-list of North American Birds, Seventh Edition". American Ornithologists' Union. Archived from the original on 2008-02-24. Retrieved 2008-03-08.  - A recognized source on the taxonomy of birds found in North and Middle America.


== Further reading ==
Connecticut Birds (Zeranski and Baptist, 1990)
The Atlas of Breeding birds of Connecticut (Bevier, 1994)
The Connecticut Warbler, journal of the Connecticut Ornithological Association