Momin Prohod (Bulgarian: Момин проход) is located in western Bulgaria and is part of the Kostenets Municipality in the Sofia Province, about 70 km (43 mi) from city of Sofia. In 2006 it obtained administrative autonomy and the status of town (град).

It is a health resort and spa in southwest part of Sredna Gora mountain. The resort is an important therapeutic and rehabilitation centre for several diseases. The water of Momin Prohod is second to that of the Narechenski Bani spa in its radioactivity. Third in Europe, and 25th in the world.
Its fame owes to the achievements of the local specialists in the healing of diseases of the respiratory, the cardiovascular, the nervous and the digestive systems, of metabolic and different kinds of allergic conditions.
Specialists have provided the favourable influence of the rich in radon mineral waters on diseases of the cardiovascular system. What is more, some ten years ago, they developed and presently successfully apply a methodology for the treatment of pulmonary diseases and hypertonia, including a complex of taking mineral vane, inhalation and negative ionization in rooms specially equipped for that purpose. For years on end curement of post poliomyelitis conditions of children is practised here.
The treatment with rich in radon mineral waters accelerates the reporative and regenerative processes and influences the antiseptic processes and conditions of aggravation of the peripheral nervous system. The rich in radon mineral water of Momin Prohod is successfully applied for the treatment of skin diseases, light forms of diabetes, obesity and joint disturbance. Some recent investigations proved the prognosis of the scientists about the favourable influence of the water on the immune reactivity of human organism and its strengthened resistance to ray injuries.


== Info ==
Average annual temperature - + 10,5о С.
Mineral water - hyperthermal 65 to 68о С, weakly mineral, sulphate-sodium, moderately fluoric.
Main health factors - mineral water and mud, electric-treatment and termal procedures


== Gallery ==


== References ==
^ (Bulgarian) Population Chart as of 15 March 2009 from Directorate General: Civil Registration and Administrative Services
^ (Bulgarian)Момин проход вече е град, dnes.bg, 21 September 2006