
== Definition ==
Cardboard furniture is a furniture designed to be made from cardboard, or heavy wood-based types of paper.


== History and Development ==
Although people have lived on and around cardboard for as long as it has existed, it was probably first introduced to the design world by Frank Gehry (b. 1929). The line, which is still made and sold by Vitra, consists of modern chairs, tables. Made with hidden screws and fiberboard edging, the tables are said to hold thousands of pounds. The "Wiggle Chair," which has won many design awards and has been included in museum shows at London's Design Museum and elsewhere, contains 60 layers of corrugated cardboard held together by hidden screws and fibreboard edging.
In the Beginning of the 80's cardboard furniture becomes very popular in France by the technique of Eric Guiomar. It is totally different to the technique of Frank O. Gehry. The furniture in the technique of Guiomar is made with corrugated cardboard, simple, double and triple groove. First, a frame is created with intertwined cardboard plates which are cut out according to the original design. This is the support frame of the piece, just like it would be the case for a ship. Then, the frame is covered with cardboard that will be "rolled" on its forms to a perfect fit. This technique allows a great freedom in the choice of shapes and materials.
There are five different types of cardboard furniture.
The Frank O. Gehry style: The furniture shape is cut out of cardboard many times and put together for a solid piece.
Move-Cardboard technique: The Pieces of furniture are built like packaging and then can be fitted together at home in her form like move cardboards
The lightweight construction style
The environment friendly paper tube chair. :
Frame construction and coverage. :


== Future of Cardboard Furniture ==
The idea of using cardboard as a material for constructing furniture is becoming increasingly popular, especially given its sustainable credentials. In North America, there are companies which sell their furniture online including Fold School Our Paper Life and Smart Deco.
UK-based companies are pioneering the use of cardboard to design and manufacture 100% sustainable furniture. Cardboard Future Ltd was established in 2009 by entrepreneur Rod Fountain and designer Mary Dorrington Ward, with the remit to carry out R&D in cardboard furniture and interior design. In 2010 the company launched the Paperweight Desk to wide critical acclaim as the first cardboard desk to comply with the same European standards for strength and stability as a conventional desk made from wood and steel (in Esquire, Elle Decoration, OnOffice, Country Living, Living Etc., Financial Times). To create this, without the use of any additional materials, screws or brackets, specially corrugated board is required, using stronger paper for the liners and fluting of the board. The desk is believed to be the first 100% fully sustainable office desk in the world.
Cardboard Future also work with exhibition organisers, including the Affordable Art Fair and Advanstar Communications (organiser of the popular fashion shows Magic and Project). In this role Cardboard Future designs, manufactures and installs exhibition information stands and tables made from cardboard for their exhibitions throughout the USA and Europe.
Rod Fountain and Mary Dorrington Ward subsequently launched a completely new company Fluteoffice, which specialises in contemporary design office furniture. The company is currently expanding its Flute PRO Range, the first product being the Flute PRO Desk, the world's first truly mass-produced and fit for purpose cardboard desk.


== Literature ==
Dry, Graham. "Hans Günther Reinstein und seine Möbel aus Pappe". In: Kunst in Hessen und am Mittelrhein (1982) 22, S. 131 ff.
Martens, Bob. Das Kartonmöbel. Wien: Technische Universität Wien, 1995 [ISBN 3-901153-03-9]
Minke, Gemot. "Bauen mit Pappe". In: DBZ (1977) 11, S. 1497-1500.
Schreibmayer, Peter. "Cardboards. Bauen mit Pappe." In: Architektur Aktuell (1991) 146, S. 20-21.
Digel, Marion. "Papermade. Wohnen mit Objekten aus Papier und Karton", München 2002 [ISBN 3-576-11580-3]
Leblois, Olivier. "Carton. Mobilier/Éco-Design/Architecture", Marseille 2008 [ISBN 978-2-86364-186-6]
Begleitbuch zur Ausstellung "EINRICHTEN - Leben in Karton", Städtische Galerie Villa Zanders, Bergisch Gladbach 2008
CARDBOARDBOOK (Ginko Press 2010) [ISBN 978-1-58423-371-8]


== References ==
^ Papp-Art, lightweight construction.
^ Compagnie-Bleuzen, lightweight construction.
^ La Cartonniere, lightweight construction.
^ [1], Auction result: Paper tube chair by Manfred Kielnhofer.
^ http://www.esquire.co.uk/2010/01/weve-seen-the-future-its-made-of-cardboard/ We’ve seen the future – it’s made of cardboard, Esquire, January 2010