Sunnylab Sunnylab is a specialist supplier of purified human antigens and reagents to the diagnostic and life science research and development community. It is a subsidiary of SCIPAC Ltd, a global manufacturer of diagnostic reagents In 2010, SCIPAC Ltd became part of BBInternational.


== History ==
SCIPAC was formed in 1985 by Tony Raeside and Dr Clive Dawes to deliver a 'complete scientific package for the diagnostic industry'. Today, the company is known as a manufacturer of reagents used in the production of diagnostic test kits, controls, calibrator solutions and life science research. The company is a member of the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC).
Amongst the industry recognition that the company has received are the 'Innovation In Business' Award at the Swale Business Awards in 2009. In 2010, SCIPAC won The Queens Award for Enterprise in both the 'Innovation' and 'International Trade' categories.
In November 2009, SCIPAC established Sunnylab to serve medical and biochemical researchers who require only small amounts of reagents to conduct their studies. Designed as an online service, Sunnylab supplies research products in volumes as small as 100 µg.
In addition to an ecommerce element, the Sunnylab business also includes a social network facility where researchers can share ideas as well as sell diagnostic reagents that they have created during their research.


== Life science products ==
Sunnylab provides a range of over 500 reagent and human antigen products, including:
Human Proteins
Disease State Plasma
Patient Samples
Serum
Depleted Serums
Cell Culture Proteins
HbA1C Solutions
Monoclonal Antibodies
Polyclonal Antibodies
Transferrins
The company operates a quality management system which complies with the requirements of the BS EN ISO 9001:2000 and BS EN ISO 13485 standards, and has been registered with the British Standards Institute (BSI) since January 1993.


== Researcher community ==
The Sunnylab online community facility allows medical and biochemical researchers to:
Connect and communicate with researchers worldwide. Sell their own diagnostic reagent products Discuss their research and publish findings. Post their CV and apply for jobs at participating universities and research establishments.
The process of a researcher selling their own products is conducted with the full approval of the relevant university or research institution.


== References ==


== External links ==
Sunnylab official site
Sunnylab community site
SCIPAC official site
BBInternational official site