In the fictional Bleach manga/ anime universe, a hollow (虚（ホロウ, horō) is a monstrous ghost that ought to be slain and purified or else it will feed on other souls. Many of the series' antagonists are hollows; also, the fictional universe also has hollows with Soul Reaper-like characteristics called arrancars (破面（アランカル）, arankaru, Spanish for "to tear off," kanji translates as "broken mask"). One of the series' main storylines has Sōsuke Aizen (ithe primary antagonist for the majority of the series) and his arrancars (particularly the ten Espadas, the strongest ones) as the force opposing the protagonists.
The creator of the series, Tite Kubo, used many Spanish motifs for the series' hollow-related elements. The fictional creatures have been praised by reviewers for the early hollows' strong emotional ties to their victims and the "interesting" concept of the arrancar; the visual appearance of the characters have also been commented on.


== In-universe Overview of HollowsEdit ==

In the Bleach universe, a hollow is a monstrous spirit that is reduced to madly feeding on other souls after it was overwhelmed by its negative emotions or forcibly converted by other hollows. All hollows have masks attached to their faces and a hollow hole somewhere on their bodies; they also have a tendency to attack those who were close to them in their human lives, which they superficially have no recollection of. Like all spirit beings, hollows possess individual “spirit energy” (also called reiatsu or reishi),which they increase the level of through their devouring of souls.
An arrancar is a hollow which has gained Soul Reaper-like characteristics through the removal of its mask, thus resulting in an increased combat versatility and a more humanoid appearance. The convertion of a hollow into an arrancar can occur either naturally or artificially, but there is little information on process that occurs. The arrancars affiliated with Aizen wear distinctive white uniforms. They retain the Mexican aesthetic borne by hollows, and according to Tite Kubo, many of them are named after real life architects and designers. The arrancars (except the ten Espadas) are given individual numbers which are based on the order of their birth (starting at the number 11); most arrancars are labeled as part of the Números (数字持ち（ヌメロス）, Numerosu, Spanish for "Numbers", Japanese translates as "Number Holders").
Soul Reapers, including protagonist Ichigo Kurosaki, have two primary duties, one of which is to slay and purify any hollows they encounter to protect other souls from being devoured (the other duty is to perform a ritual known as a soul burial (魂葬（こんそう）, konsō) to lay ghosts to rest before they become hollows). When either of these duties is fulfilled, the soul goes to the Soul Society to live as an ordinary human until reincarnation on earth. If a hollow committed grave sins in life, its purification instead opens the Gates of Hell (referred to as the Underworld in the English Dub), and it is dragged to Hell for punishment. Hollow intrusions into Ichigo's hometown are the driving plot force for Bleach's first arc, at the end of which Ichigo leaves earth for Soul Society in order to rescue one of his friends.
Arrancar are introduced into Bleach following Ichigo's return from Soul Society, and are major antagonists from that point until their collective defeat in the Fake Karakura Arc. Most of the arrancar antagonists served Sōsuke Aizen, who used the hōgyoku, a powerful magical artifact, to create arrancars from the hollows of Hueco Mundo. Many arrancar are as sadistic or insane as any hollow, but arrancar can also display honor, compassion, and some even befriend the heroes. The arrancar are first shown scouting Ichigo's hometown by ones and twos, which escalates into sorties, and eventually a battle on earth and in Hueco Mundo between the most powerful arrancar and Soul Reapers. Following Aizen's defeat, the arrancar survivors are captured by Quincies (an army of humans who rival the Soul Reapers), and either drafted as soldiers to fight the Soul Reapers again, or executed as monsters.
Hollows and arrancar inhabit a dimension called Hueco Mundo (虚圏（ウェコムンド）, Weko Mundo, Spanish for "Hollow World," kanji translates as "Hollow Domain"), a vast barren desert with quarts "trees" which any hollow can access, leave and return to by tearing a hole in space called a Garganta. While in Hueco Mundo, most hollows can sate their hunger simply by breathing the reishi-rich air, and are threatened only by other hollows who have turned to cannibalism, conquest for power and sport, or both. Hueco Mundo is initially portrayed as impossible to access by non-hollows, but techniques for traveling there are eventually revealed, and Hueco Mundo was entered by outsiders, first by protagonist Ichigo Kurosaki and his allies, then later by Quincy conquerors. An enormous white domed palace.called Las Noches (虚夜宮（ラス・ノーチェス）, Rasu Nōchesu, Spanish for "The Nights," kanji translates as "Hollow Night Palace") in Hueco Mundo was used by Aizen to garrison his troops,


== In-universe Powers and abilities of HollowsEdit ==
Like all spirit beings, hollows are invisible to humans with no reishi. All hollows can use their reishi to increase their strength, speed, and regeneration. Furthermore, some hollows have evolved their own unique capabilities, which are all fueled by their spiritual energy.
Hollows, after eating other souls (which can include other hollows) sufficiently, become stronger, and hollows who remain successful at devouring souls and avoiding being slain eventually evolve into formidable foes known as Menos (メノス, Menosu, Spanish for "less big/not as big," kanji translates as "Great Hollow") which are classified and divided into three succeeding stages. The first stage, the Gillian (最下大虚（ギリアン）, Girian, kanji translates as "Least of the Great Hollows") also called Menos Grandes (大虚（メノスグランデ）, Menosu Gurande, Spanish for "less big/not as big," kanji translates as "Great Hollow"), are mindless black conglomerate giants that eventually shrink into the animalistic Adjuchas (中級大虚（アジューカス）, Ajūkasu, kanji translates as "Intermediate Great Hollow") when they develop a personality from one of the component Hollows. An Adjuchas continues feeding on other hollows until it eventually enters the third state and becomes the semi-humanoid Vasto Lorde (最上大虚（ヴァストローデ）, Vasuto Rōde, Spanish for "complete lord," kanji translates as "Great King of the Hollows"). While the first two stages demand the involvement of stronger Soul Reaper officers to dispatch them, Vasto Lordes pose an existential threat to the entire Soul Society. All Menos are capable of using Cero (虚閃 (セロ), Sero, Spanish for "Zero", kanji translates as "Hollow Flash", sometimes called "Doom Blast" in the Viz manga), a powerful blast of spirit energy depicted as a sphere or beam of colored light.
Arrancars possess any and all of the supernatural abilities hollows have.Many Menos-based arrancars have their own special, unique variations of cero. The abilities arrancars have include: sonido (響転（ソニード）, sonīdo, Spanish for "sound," kanji translates as "moving sound"), which momentarily boosts their speed, bala (虚弾 (バラ), bara; Spanish for "Bullet," kanji translates as "hollow bullet") a glowing colored projectile made of solidified reiatsu that is described as being weaker than cero but is twenty times faster, and hierro (鋼皮（イエロ）, iero, Spanish for "iron," kanji translates as "steel skin") a defensive technique which hardens their skin to the point that they can catch blades bare-handed. Additionally, like Soul Reapers, all arrancar possess a zanpakutō (斬魄刀, literally, "soul-cutting sword"), a personal magical weapon which channels their own certain personal power/s. When "released" through a process called Resurrección (帰刃（レスレクシオン）, resurekushion, Spanish for "resurrection," kanji translates as "returning blade"), the sword combines with and changes the appearance of the arrancar, typically into an animalistic, demonic, or even mechanical form reminiscent of its body when it was a hollow, and heals it of all its previous injuries.


== HollowsEdit ==
The majority of named hollows appearing in Bleach are monsters of the week used during Bleach's first arc. After Ichigo's return from Soul Society, the hollow-based characters known as arrancar are introduced, with the basic hollows having lesser roles and rarely used as villains except in the anime side-story episodes.
Fishbone D (フィッシュボーン D, Fisshubōn Dī)
Voiced by: Yutaka Aoyama (Japanese), Michael Sorich (English)
Fishbone D is one of the first enemies to appear in Bleach, a humanoid hollow with fish-like features. He attacks Ichigo Kurosaki's home and wounds Rukia Kuchiki, forcing Rukia to turn Ichigo into a Soul Reaper and providing the premise for the story.
Acidwire (アシッドワイヤー, Ashiddowaiyā)
Voiced by: Yuji Ueda (Japanese), Liam O'Brien (English)
In life, Sora Inoue (井上昊, Inoue Sora) was Orihime's older brother and guardian before he died three years before the events of the series. However, Sora remained in the Land of the Living and watched over Orihime as he eventually begins to feel lonely while resenting the friends she has made as she begins to pray less for him. This, along with being dragged to Hueco Mundo by a Hollow at the behest of Grand Fisher in the anime, causes Sora to transform into the naga-like Hollow Acidwire as he proceeds to attack Orihime's friends while separating her soul from her body. During the battle, Acidwire regains his humanity after his mask is shattered in battle with Ichigo, using the Soul Reaper's Zanpakutō to voluntarily purify himself before he could lose his mind again.
Shrieker (シュリーカー, Shurīkā)
Voiced by: Hisao Egawa (Japanese), J.B. Blanc (English)
Shrieker is a frog-like hollow with bat elements and the ability to summon numerous explosive minions. Shrieker was a serial killer in life who died when a boy Yūichi Shibata attempted to save his mother from the murderer. After becoming a Hollow, Shrieker gets revenge on Yūichi by placing his soul in a parakeet and lying that he can revive the boy's mother if he evades him for three months. However, Shrieker only started the game to gain more victims for those Yūichi such as two Soul Reapers who tried to save the boy. Shrieker attacks Yasutora "Chad" Sado when he adopted Yūichi, leading to his death. But as Shrieker committed evil acts while human, he is dragged into Hell. In an episode a tie-in to the Bleach: Hell Verse, still possessing his Hollow powers, a vengeful Shrieker returns to the Land of the Living as a Sinner to attack Rukia. Though Shrieker is forced to escape back to hell after being defeated by Renji Abarai, it turned out Shriker was a pawn in Gunjō's experiment and was disposed of once he served his purpose.
Grand Fisher (グランドフィッシャー, Gurando Fisshā)
Voiced by: Chafurin (Japanese), Paul St. Peter (English)
Grand Fisher is a fur-covered hollow with a second body resembling an anglerfish's lure dangling from his head. This second body is visible even to normal humans, and can change in appearance to resemble someone the target of his hunt loves. Grand Fisher is the first major villain in Bleach as he is introduced as the killer of Ichigo Kurosaki's mother, Masaki. Ichigo fights Grand Fisher on the anniversary of Masaki's death, defeating the Hollow but unable to prevent him from fleeing when his lure transforms into his mother. Grand Fisher then retreats to Hueco Mundo, having later allied with Aizen who turned the hollow into an enormous arrancar. Though Grand Fisher never encounters Ichigo to have his revenge, mistakenly chasing Kon in Ichigo's body, Grand Fisher is killed by Masaki's husband Isshin Kurosaki. Ichigo later learns that his mother's death was also caused by Yhwach, whose Auswählen rendered Masaki defenseless against Grand Fisher.
Metastacia (メタスタシア, Metasutashia)
Voiced by: Hōchū Ōtsuka (Japanese), Kyle Hebert (English)
Metastacia is a quadrupedal hollow with many tentacles growing from his back, introduced in a flashback establishing Rukia Kuchiki's past. As one of Sōsuke Aizen's creations, Metastacia specializes in hunting Soul Reapers as his tentacles have the ability to shatter zanpakutō while he can merge into the body of a Soul Reaper, possessing the host permanently. When his lair in Soul Society is attacked by the Soul Reapers, Metastacia possesses Kaien Shiba, forcing Rukia Kuchiki to defeat him by impaling Kaien's body. He is at that point believed dead, but it is later revealed that Metastacia survives long enough to return to Hueco Mundo, where Aaroniero Arruruerie devours him, thereby indirectly gaining the powers of Kaien Shiba.
White (ホワイト, Howaito)
Another of Aizen's early experiments in blending hollow and Soul Reaper abilities, created from Soul Reaper souls, White is a black-colored, horned, humanoid hollow. In a flashback starring parents of the main cast, White hunts Soul Reapers until he is defeated by the combined efforts of Isshin Shiba and Masaki Kurosaki. However, it is revealed that Aizen created White with the ability to infects his victims with a fragment of his spirit to induce hollowification. While Aizen intended White to infect a Soul Reaper, the hollow infected Masaki instead. The circumstances of the event results with Isshin sacrificing his Soul Reaper powers and live with Masaki to allow her to live a normal life as they eventually married. The infection is transmitted to their son Ichigo Kurosaki at birth and served in the formation of Ichigo's own inner hollow.


== ArrancarEdit ==


=== EspadaEdit ===

The Espadas (十刃（エスパーダ）, Esupāda, Spanish for "sword," kanji translates as "ten blades") are an order of ten arrancar who are the strongest and most powerful in Sosuke Aizen’s army; each member represents an aspect of death (according to Bleach lore). They are ranked from 10 to 1 based on reiatsu density( not necessarily battle skill or prowess), with 10 the weakest and 1 the strongest. However, the Espadas are also ranked from 9 to 0, since Yammy Llargo, basically the weakest Espada, can become the strongest when certain conditions are met. Espadas of ranks 4 to 0 are forbidden from using Resurrección within the confines of Las Noches due to their immense destructive potential, which could be enough to destroy the fortress. Espadas may be demoted when they are maimed, replaced by a more powerful arrancar, or have violated Aizen's orders.The Espadas are also allowed to personally choose any two-digit arrancar as their direct subordinate, referred to as their Fracción (従属官（フラシオン）, Furashion, Spanish for "fraction," kanji translates as "Subordinate Official"). Each Espada also possesses a Caja de Negación (反膜の匪（カハ・ネガシオン）, Kaha Negashion, Spanish for "Negation Box"), a cube-like item whose apparent function is to temporarily seal away any one Fracción as a punishment, but may also be used on Espada arrancars .


==== Yammy RiyalgoEdit ====
Yammy Riyalgo (ヤミー・リヤルゴ, Yamī Riyarugo, romanized as Yammy Llargo in the Japanese media), as signified by the "10" tattooed to his left shoulder, is the Decimo Espada, but only when he is not on his Resurrección form. The aspect of death he represents is rage. Yammy is also "Espada Number 0", as the "1" on his tattoo flakes off through his Resurrección, and thus the most powerful Espada. Yammy primarily uses his brute strength, along with bala and Cero blasts, in battle, taking little interest in using his sword unless he is overwhelmed.
He has three unique abilities: the first is called Gonzui (魂吸（ゴンズイ）, kanji translates as "soul suction"), which allows him to suck souls from living humans (except those with reishi, which allows them to resist the technique)en masse within a wide area, the second is to conserve reiatsu through lots of eating and rest; the third is to gain additional spiritual pressure from his rage. The name of his Zanpakutō is Ira (憤獸（イーラ）, Īra, Spanish for "Anger," kanji translates as "Angry Beast"). When released, all the reiatsu he has conserved beforehand will be unleashed, granting him the rank 0 (assuming he has conserved enough reiatsu), causing Yammy's size and power to increase dramatically as he takes on the form of an incredibly gigantic, multi-legged Ankylosaurus-like centaur. By this point, Yammy can easily crush Soul Reapers with one of his huge hands, create relatively extremely massive ceros, and boast as being stronger than Ulqiuorra, Nnoitra, and Grimmjow (see the Ulquiorra, Nnoitra, and Grimmjow subsections below) combined. Furthermore, Yammy may gain additional sequential transformations whenever his rage becomes high enough, these forms resembling different animals, with each form much more powerful titanic than the one before it.
Yammy is one of the first arrancars to be introduced, appearing alongside Ulquiorra when they arrive in the human world to find Ichigo Kurosaki. Soon after they arrive, Ichigo and his friends appear, and a battle occurs between them, in which Yammy loses an arm to Ichigo before they retreat. Later, an arrancar surgeon reattatched Yammy's arm and he accompanied Luppi, Grimmjow, and Wonderweiss to attack the Soul Reapers in the human world. He shortly loses to Kisuke before he and his allies fall back back to Hueco Mundo. There, he rests and eats as much as he could. He later arrives on Ichigo's battle with Ulquiorra and fights Uryu, who was protecting Orihime, and Yammy is eventually sent to the bottom of the palace by Uryu's anti-arrancar land mines. He later emerges on the aftermath of the battle against Rudbornn Chelute, accidentally smashing the subdued arrancar. Yammy enters resurreccion and defeats Rukia, Chad, and Renji, and then picks up Rukia, and contemplates on how he should kill her, because, simply crushing her would be too quick and unsatisfying for him. Ichigo saves Rukia and takes over the battle, which was shortly taken over by Byakuya Kuchiki and Kenpachi Zaraki so Ichigo, being the only Shinigami not affected by Aizen's Shikai, could fight and defeat him. When Kenpachi Zaraki managed to disable Yammy, he undergoes a second, much larger transformation. He is eventually defeated by the two Soul Reapers.
He is voiced by Kenji Nomura in the Japanese version and by Paul St. Peter in the English dub.


==== Coyote Stark and Lilinette GingerbuckEdit ====
Coyote Stark (コヨーテ・スターク, Koyōte Sutāku, romanized as Coyote Starrk in the Japanese media) is the Primera Espada, signified by the "1" tattooed on the back of his left hand. The aspect of death he represents is solitude. His sole Fracción is Lilinette Gingerbuck (リリネット・ジンジャーバック, Ririnetto Jinjābakku, romanized as Lilynette Gingerback in the Japanese media), who is actually a part of him. Naturally created Arrancars, Stark and Lilynette were created from a single hollow that split its soul into two out of loneliness caused by its vast spiritual pressure being too deadly for weaker hollows and lesser beings to be around. Though Starrk does not remember their original hollow form, the fact he had a counterpart for company was comforting. The two encountered Aizen sometime after coming into being and allied with him as they saw him to be someone who can stay with them without dying. Lilynette typically shows the concern that Starrk does not, giving him incentive. Their personalities are foils of a sort: Starrk appears to be lazy and uninterested in fighting, often not fighting at his full power, and Lilinette is apparently aggressive and vicious.
Starrk has a somewhat implied extremely fine visual acuity. Although Lilinette is essentially Starrk's zanpakutō, he has a reiatsu sword which he uses to fight before his release. The Ceros he fires are larger than those of the other Espadas (potentially except those of the Ressureccion Yammy). Lilynette, while aggressive, is weaker and her Cero is described as less powerful than that of a Gillian. Due to their nature, Starrk has to absorb Lilynette back into him in order to assume his Resurrección. Upon releasing Los Lobos (群狼(ロス・ロボス), Rosu Robosu, Spanish for "The Wolves," kanji translates as "Wolf Pack"), Starrk's and Lilynette's reiatsu swords disappear, and Starrk transforms to resemble a gunslinger, gaining a fur-lined suit, a pair of bandoliers, and a left eyepiece resembling Lilynette's mask fragment. Starrk takes on some of Lilynette's personality quirks, becoming more vocal and short tempered. He wields two ornamental guns that fire off ceros in rapid succession, one of the guns being Lilynette with whom he is able to converse. With his right pistol, Starrk can use a cero variety called Cero Metralleta (無限装弾虚閃 (セロ・メトラジェッタ), Sero Metorajetta, Spanish for "Sub-Machine Gun Zero," kanji translates as "Infinite Ammunition Hollow Flash"), which is a cero that is split into myriads of explosives, with each piece as powerful as his regular cero, and these pieces are fired thousands at a time. However, Starrk's and Lilinette's true ability is to splinter portions of their spirit to create an army of powerful spirit energy wolves that obey their creator's commands and detonate at will. These wolves can also teleport, and they bite Starrk's targets to keep them from escaping. Once they explode or are hit by an attack, they instantly reform, and therefore they are virtually indestructible; however, in the anime, they can be destroyed only by Kyōraku(one of the Soul Reaper characters)'s bushogoma technique. Though Starrk's guns are sacrificed for him to use their true ability, with most of Lilynette's soul being mixed in the wolves, Starrk can conjure swords for close combat.
During the battle at the fake Karakura town, Starrk is engaged into a duel by Shunsui Kyoraku, to whom he suggests that they pretend to fight until everyone else is done. Lilynette attempts to fight Jushiro Ukitake, who easily disarms her. When Starrk sees the bankai of the other captains, he calls Lilinette and he releases, partly to bribe Shunsui into activating his bankai. Starrk later finds himself also fighting against Ukitake, who views the fight as a 2v2 battle. Later, Wonderweiss arrives and stabs Ukitake, and Starrk fires a Point blank Cero on Kyoraku, temprarily placing him out of the battle. The Visoreds arrive, and Starrk finds himself against the Visoreds Love and Rose. Later, Baraggan is defeated, and Starrk takes great offense to his death; this, along with Lilynette's egging him on, causes Starrk to unleash their true ability on the Visoreds, allowing them to overcome Love and Rose. Before Starrk could deliver the finishing blow, however, he receives a stab from behind coming from Shunsui Kyoraku. He and Starrk fight. In the anime, Lilynette's being is extinguished once Kyōraku takes out all of Stark's wolves; a scene not present in the original manga. The battle ends with Stark fatally wounded by Kyōraku, apologizing to Aizen not repaying him as he crashes to the ground below. In his final moments, Starrkk realizes he was never alone due to Lilynette and the other Espadas.
Starrk and Lilynette are voiced by Rikiya Koyama and Kiyomi Asai respectively in the Japanese version and by Keith Silverstein and Kate Higgins respectively in the English dub.


==== Baraggan LouisenbairnEdit ====
Baraggan Louisenbairn (バラガン・ルイゼンバーン, Baragan Ruizenbān, romanized as Barragan Louisenbairn in the Japanese media) is the Segunda Espada. His name references Mexican architect Luis Barragán, on whose minimalistic architectural style the design of Hueco Mundo's castles was based. Before becoming an Espada, Barragan was a warlord in Hueco Mundo, ruling from a roofless castle as the self-titled "God of Hueco Mundo", boasting that his palace does not need an actual roof because all the skies of Hueco Mundo are his roof. Aizen, in preparation to defect from the Soul Society, offered Baraggan greater power if he would ally with him. Though he refused the offer, Baraggan was forced to submit after Aizen easily killed many of his followers and bore a grudge against the Soul Reaper through his entire career as an Espada.
As an Espada, Baraggan's representation of death is senescence, the death brought on by age. He has the unique ability to control entropy, weakening and slowing down the bodies of enemies who come near to him as if they had become elderly; thus, he can easily avoid the attacks of his opponents. His touch can make the body parts of his enemies age to the point of becoming immovable and useless. His zanpakutō is Arrogante (髑髏大帝（アロガンテ）, Arogante, Spanish for "Arrogant," kanji translates as "Great Skull Emperor"), a giant battle-axe which he stores inside his throne of skulls. When released, Baraggan returns to his original hollow form, a hovering crowned lich, and manifests his original hollow form's weapon, a larger axe named Gran Caída (滅亡の斧（グラン･カイダ）, Guran Kaida, Spanish for "Great Fall," kanji translates as "Downfallen Axe"). In this form, Baraggan's aging powers are intensified to the point where everything around him is continuously rotting away and being totally destroyed (because of this, almost no attacks ever touch him), and he can exhale Respira (死の息吹（レスピラ）, Resupira, Spanish for "breathe", kanji translates as "Breath of Death"), a mist that erodes whatever it touches. This ranges from decaying both living and non-living things into dust to deteriorating magical barriers and weapons. Respira is double edged, but Baraggan is usually unaffected as his exterior is covered with something that helps protect his body from his own attack's effect.
After Aizen was trapped inside Yamamoto's magical fire prison, Baraggan temporarily presides over the battle after Starrk refused the duty. He sendes four hollows to destroy the four pillars to send the real Karakura town to Earth so they could destroy it earlier. however these hollows were defeated, prompting barragan to send four of his Fracciones to the pillars. After they are defeated, Baraggan rages, causing his remaining two Fracciones to fight in the battle, finding themselves against Soi Fon and Omaeda. When the two Fracciones are also defeated Baraggan decides to personally participate in the battle himself. He overcomes Soi Fon and Omaeda, until Soi Fon activates her bankai and fires a missile at him, temporarily placing him out of the battle, not because he was defeated, but because he had destroyed the missile before it hit him and he waited for the flames of the explosion in front of him to fade away. Later, after the flames were extinguished by Wonderweiss, Baraggan continues his fight against Soi Fon and Omaeda and finds himself also fighting the Visored Hachigen. Hachigen's magical barriers slow down Baraggan, and eventually Soi Fon lands a missile on him with the aid of Hachigen's magical kido spells. Baraggan survives this, suffering no more than a a head injury, with even his clothes intact. He eventually decays Hachigen as well, but Hachigen teleports his respira-infected arm into Baraggan's insides, causing Baraggan to decay himself. As he deteriorates into dust, Baraggan makes an attempt on Aizen's life, and fails.
Baraggan is voiced by Shōzō Iizuka in the Japanese anime. In the English version, he is voiced first by Steve Kramer in the Hueco Mundo arc, and then Michael McConnohie in the Fake Karakura Town arc.


==== Tier HalibelEdit ====
Tier Halibel (ティア・ハリベル, Tia Hariberu, romanized as Tier Harribel in the Japanese media) is the Tercera Espada, signified by the "3" tattooed on the left side of her right breast. She is also the only female Espada. The aspect of death she represents is sacrifice. She appears calm and rarely speaks; when she does, it is fairly serious. In contrast to the majority of her fellow Espada, Halibel prefers not to engage in combat, much less commit acts of unnecessary slaughter; she is content with silently observing the battle between Soul Reapers and Arrancars until it reaches its conclusion and refuses to fight unless she or her Fracciones are challenged or ordered by her superiors. The only reason she wants power is to protect those who she cares about such as her Fracciones.
In the anime, Halibel's backstory as a shark-like Vasto Lorde, in which she gathers female Menos to work together against more aggressive male Menos that consider them easy prey, is revealed. After saving the three Adjuchas named Emilou Apacci, Franceska Mila Rose, and Cyan Sung-Sun, who joined her campaign, Halibel becomes at odds with Baraggan for defying him and made an enemy out of a Hammerhead hollow who attacked her group once becoming an arrancar. Only able to survive because of Aizen's intervention, touched by his speech of not wanting needless sacrifice, Halibel joins his group with her three comrades becoming her Fracciónes: the Tres Bestias.
Her Zanpakutō is named Tiburón (皇鮫后（ティブロン）, Tiburon, Spanish for "Shark", kanji translates as "Imperial Shark Empress"). She carries it horizontally behind her shoulders; the sword itself is notably broad and short compared to those of other Espada, and the inner portion is hollow, with only the "outline" of the sword. The sword can create 'ribbons' of energy from the empty inner portion named Ola Azul (波蒼砲（オーラ・アズール）, Ōra Azūru, Spanish for "Blue Wave", kanji translate as "Blue Wave Gun") to be used in combat. When released, she loses the portion of the hollow mask that covers her face and gains markings on each side of her face, as well as two wing-like protrusions on her back, an armored skirt, and armor that covers her arms, shoulders and legs. She also carries a massive pata, which resembles an elongated shark tooth. Her strength and speed are increased in this state, evident by the charge and blow she delivers to Tōshirō Hitsugaya, severing a large portion of his upper-body before he could even react (though this was later revealed to be a clone of Hitsugaya made of ice). She is able to conjure and control large amounts of water to perform attacks in this form.
Her battle with Tōshirō starts off in her favor, but soon levels to a draw as their powers are opposites. However, as she attempts to avenge her Fracciónes' apparent deaths by Yamamoto, Tōshirō reveals that his Zanpakutō Hyōrinmaru can control the weather. He then proceeds to trap her in an ice prison with his newly learned Hyōten Hyakkasō technique, leaving her to die. However, Wonderweiss arrives and frees her by just yelling. Halibel then engages Tōshirō and the Visards Hiyori and Lisa, maintaining her ground despite being outnumbered. After witnessing the deaths of Stark and Barragan, Aizen interrupts Halibel's battle and slashes her with his sword, stating that she "is not strong enough to fight for him anymore." Halibel recalls her past and, after an unsuccessful attempt to kill him, Aizen cuts Halibel down as she is disillusioned that their ideals on sacrifice are vastly different. Though her injury was fatal, Orihime heals Halibel's wounds at the battle's conclusion, allowing her and the Tres Bestias to return to Hueco Mundo, where Halibel reluctantly became the land's ruler by default.
Seventeen months later, Halibel is defeated by the Wandenreich leader, Yhwach, and is imprisoned while her captors take over Hueco Mundo.
She is voiced by Megumi Ogata in the Japanese version and by Laura Bailey in the English dub.


===== Tres BestiasEdit =====
The Tres Bestias (3獣神 (トレス・ベスティア), Toresu Besutia, Spanish for "Three Beasts", kanji translate as "Three Beast Goddesses") is a trio of female arrancars who serve as Tier Halibel's Fracciónes. It is composed of the deer-themed Arrancar 54 Emilou Apacci (エミルー・アパッチ, Emiruu Apatchi), the lion-themed Arrancar 55 Franceska Mila Rose (フランチェスカ・ミラ・ローズ, Furanchesuka Mira Rōzu), and the snake-themed arrancar 56 Cyan Sung-Sun (シィアン・スンスン, Shīan Sunsun). Although the three are loyal to Halibel and dangerous as a group, their relationship with each other is dysfunctional with occasional insults and death threats. They were Adjuchas in their early lives when saved by Halibel, the three joining her cause to protect themselves from male hollows that prey on them. Some time after Halibel's audience with Baraggan, the Tres Bestias tried to help Halibel when her base was attacked by a hammerhead arrancar who wanted to kill their leader for her act against him when he was a hollow in Baraggan's court. Though the Tres Bestias were easily defeated, they were saved by Sōsuke Aizen.
Apacci's Zanpakutō is Cierva (碧鹿闘女（シエルバ）, Shieruba, Spanish for "Doe," Japanese for "Blue Deer Battle Girl"), which is actually the collars she wears over her wrists. When released, Apacci becomes more deer-like with brown fur, antlers, and hooves in the place of her feet. Mila Rose's Zanpakutō is Leona (金獅子将（レオーナ）, Reōna, Spanish for "Lioness", Japanese for "Gold Lion General"), which resembles a broad sword instead of the regular katana. When released, Mila Rose resembles an armored Amazon warrior with lion-shaped fangs and a lion-like mane. Sung-Sun's Zanpakutō is Anaconda (白蛇姫（アナコンダ）, Anakonda, Spanish for "Anaconda", Japanese for "White Snake Princess"), which resembles a sai that is concealed in her sleeve. When released, Sung-Sun resembles a Nāga. The Tres Bestias can also utilize their rarely used ability Quimera Parca, sacrificing their arms as materials to create the chimeric hollow Ayon.
After watching Ichigo's fight with Grimmjow, the Tres Bestias accompany Halibel to fake Karakura Town, where they end up fighting Rangiku Matsumoto until Momo Hinamori arrives to help her. Seeing the battle turn against them, they resort to summoning Ayon to defeat the Soul Reapers and most of the lieutenants who come to their aid. After Ayon is slain by Genryūsai Shigekuni Yamamoto, who refuses to kill the Tres Bestias out of respect, they are knocked out and severely wounded by Yamamoto's flame when they make an attempt on his life. After the battle, Orihime heals their wounds as they and Halibel are allowed to return to Hueco Mundo where the Tres Bestias become enforcers of the new order of Hueco Mundo founded by their leader.
However, following the Wandenreich's arrival and the capture of Halibel, the Tres Bestias refused to submit to the invaders and remained adamant of their resolve while fighting Kirge Opie as he defeated them. Though they attempt to get back in the fight by summoning Ayon during Ichigo Kurosaki's fight with Kirge, the creature ends up being absorbed by the Quincy as he stabs Apacci with Mila Rose and Sung-Sun getting her to safety. Before Quilge can kill them, Sado and Orihime, Ichigo stops him and they continue their battle.
Apacci is voiced by Kumi Sakuma in the Japanese version and by Megan Hollingshead in the English dub. Mila Rose is voiced by Sayori Ishizuka in the Japanese version and by Erin Fitzgerald in the English dub. Sung-Sun is voiced by Ayumi Sena in the Japanese version and by Karen Strassman in the English dub.


===== AyonEdit =====
Ayon (アヨン) is a chimeric hollow being created by the Tres Bestias via the technique Quimera Parca (混獣神（キメラ・パルカ）, Kimera Paruka, Spanish for "Sparing Chimera", Japanese for "Mixed-Beast God") by combining their severed left arms (which turn into energy in the anime) to create a hollow-like being that combines all of their physical attributes. Ayon has an ability called "El Martillo" (怪槌（エル・マルティージョ）, Eru Marutījo, Spanish for "The Hammer", Japanese for "Spectral Hammer"), where Ayon's size and strength increase with his anger. Though acting on his own volition, Ayon expresses concern for his creators. First summoned to the Fake Karakura Town, Ayon easily takes out Rangiku Matsumoto, Momo Hinamori, Tetsuzaemon Iba, and Shūhei Hisagi single handed, until Captain Yamamoto joins the fray to use his Shikai to destroy the beast.
Another Ayon is later summoned to fight Kirge Opie after he defeated the Tres Bestias alone, landing a blow on the Quincy as he was fighting Ichigo. Although Ayon pummels Kirge mercilessly, Kirge shrugs off the injuries and absorbs Ayon soon after.
Ayon's vocal effects are provided by Jōji Nakata in the Japanese version and by Matthew Mercer in the English dub.


==== Nelliel Tu OdelschwanckEdit ====

 Nelliel Tu Odelschwanck (ネリエル・トゥ・オーデルシュヴァンク, Nerieru Tu Ōderushuvanku), commonly known as Nel Tu (ネル・トゥ, Neru Tu) or "Nel" for short, is a good-natured, childlike arrancar when first introduced and has a habit of saying the opposite of what she actually meant. The remains of her hollow mask make up a cartoonish skull on the top of her head. She is really the former 3rd Espada, resembling a full-grown woman with a ram-horned version of her hollow mask and bearing a large "3" tattooed on her back. Compared to the other Espadas, having empathy for the least fortunate hollows that remain as feral monsters, Nelliel has a sense of honor and respect for her opponents who she sees as warriors and only kills within reason. This ideology results with her being attacked by Nnoitora Gilga from behind as part of the Espada's revenge scheme with the help of Szayelaporro's device, managing to crack her mask and tossing her unconscious body out of Las Noches before enough of her spirit energy leaked out to shrink her into current form. But as the resulting amnesia freed her of the sorrow that plagued her, Nel was able to live a carefree life with her two Fracciones bent on protecting her from the dangers of Hueco Mundo while making sure she does not remember.
By the time she is introduced in the series, Nel and her companions encounter Ichigo Kurosaki's group and help them as their guides in Hueco Mundo, though were originally afraid of Soul Reapers as they saw them to be the bad guys. But Nel develops an attachment to Ichigo and starts following him around after her introduction. As a result, when she encounters Nnoitora as he begins to torture Ichigo, Nel assumes her true form with her memories restored. Though considerably more mature than her child form, Nelliel retains her childlike voice and affection for Ichigo, as she comically hugs him without realizing that her strength is causing him personal injury. As she is about to defeat Nnoitora after assuming her released form, Nelliel reverts to her child form and was knocked unconscious before she came to as a witness to Nnoitora's death.
Seventeen months after Aizen's defeat, Nel arrives in Karakura Town and tells Ichigo about the Wandenreich, who have taken over Hueco Mundo. Both she and Pesche also inform him that Dondochakka was captured. After Kisuke gives her an armband that allows her to consciously assume her adult form, Nel later appears alongside Grimmjow to help Ichigo's team in the fight against Yhwach.
In her child-state, Nel's vomit (though she claims it to be saliva) acts as a rather weak but useful healing agent. In both her child and adult form, she can swallow Cero attacks and fire them back. In her adult form, she can also add her own Cero to this blast, doubling its power, aptly named a Cero Doble (重奏虚閃（セロ・ドーブル）, Sero Dōburu, Spanish for "Double Zero", kanji translates as "Heavy Performance Hollow Flash").
Nelliel's Zanpakutō, which manifests when she transforms, is named Gamuza (羚騎士（ガミューサ）, Gamyūsa, Spanish for suede, kanji translates as "Antelope Knight"). Her released form is that of an ibex-like centaur with longer curved horns, a thick tail, and armor over her shoulders and hands. Her sword transforms into a double-ended white lance, giving her the appearance of a medieval knight or a jouster. One of her attacks in this form is called Lanzador Verde (翠の射槍（ランサドール・ヴェルデ）, Ransadōru Verude, Spanish for "Green Lancer", kanji translates as "Green Javelin"), in which she throws her lance directly at her opponent. The lance moves at high speed and rotates extremely fast, drilling through anything it hits.
She is voiced by Tomoko Kaneda in the Japanese version and by Colleen O'Shaughnessey in the English dub.


===== Pesche GuaticheEdit =====
Pesche Guatiche (ペッシェ・ガティーシェ, Pesshe Gatīshe) is a seemingly harmless, humanoid arrancar whose body is covered in a sort of light armor, complete with a mask resembling an insectoid head with a large pair of mandibles. His hollow hole is positioned near his stomach. He was once Nelliel's Fracción, Arrancar 41, but after his mask fragment was forcibly removed by Nnoitora Gilga and Nel received amnesia, he accompanied her around Hueco Mundo to keep her safe while donning a new mask. Years later, when Nel accompanies Ichigo into Las Noches, Pesche follows her but loses her. Attempting to find Nel, Pesche ends up following Uryū Ishida, having mistaken him for Ichigo Kurosaki (and later on uses it just to irritate him), which upsets him because Uryū's appearance leads him to believe that he is the weakest of the group. Pesche possesses an ability he calls "Infinite Slick" (無限の滑走（インフィナイト・スリック）, Infinaito Surikku), in which he sprays his saliva at an object, severely reducing its friction. Contrary to its name, it is of limited supply. He carries an energy sword he calls Ultima (究極（ウルティマ）, Urutima, Spanish for "Final," kanji translates as "Ultimate") inside his loincloth, but it is unclear if it is his zanpakutō. He and Dondochakka are capable of combining their Cero attacks together to create an even more powerful attack they have named Cero Sincrético (融合虚閃（セロ・シンクレティコ）, Sero Shinkuretiko). The only time it has been shown, Szayelaporro Grantz renders the attack ineffective, making the full extent of its power unclear.
He is voiced by Takehito Koyasu in the Japanese version and by Michael P. Greco in the English dub.


===== Dondochakka BilstinEdit =====
Dondochakka Bilstin (ドンドチャッカ・ビルスタン, Dondochakka Birusutan, romanized as Dondachacka Birstanne in the Japanese media) is a large, spotted, humanoid arrancar with a tiki-style mask and compound eyes. Despite his menacing appearance, he is prone to tearful outbursts at the slightest provocation, usually when he is worried about something. Speaking in a stereotypical Bronx accent in the English version, he frequently inserts the phrase "You know what I'm saying?" (ヤンス, yansu) in his speech. He was once Nelliel's Fracción, Arrancar 42, but after his original mask fragment was forcibly removed by Nnoitora Gilga and Nel received amnesia, he accompanied her around Hueco Mundo to keep her safe. Years later, when Nel accompanies Ichigo Kurosaki and his friends, Dondochakka follows her into Las Noches where he loses her. Attempting to find Nel, Dondochakka ends up following Renji Abarai, whom he frequently irritates with his clumsiness and emotional outbursts. Dondochakka possesses numerous insect spirits within his stomach, one being Bawabawa (バワバワ), an eel-like worm hollow who acts as both pet and transportation for Nel Tu and her companions, and he can spit these spirits out at will as allies in combat. In addition, he carries a kanabō inside his stomach, but it is unclear if this is his zanpakutō.
Seventeen months after Ichigo defeats Aizen, Dondochakka is captured by the Wandenreich (who have taken over Hueco Mundo).
He was voiced by Daisuke Gōri in the Japanese version and by Pete Sepenuk in the English dub.


==== Ulquiorra CiferEdit ====
Ulquiorra Cifer (ウルキオラ・シファー, Urukiora Shifā, romanized as Ulquiorra Schiffer in the Japanese media) is the Cuarta Espada, signified by the "4" tattooed to his chest. His name is believed to either come from a furniture designer named Patricia Urquiola or a variation of "the one who cries" in Spanish which is El Que Llora.
As an albino hollow ostracized by other dark-colored hollows, Ulquiorra lived a life of loneliness as he lamented his existence before being found by Aizen and made an arrancar. As a member of the Espada whose aspect of death represents nothingness, Ulquiorra is emotionless with an inability to comprehend the meaning of "heart" and supports his firm belief that what his eye cannot see does not exist. Bent on completing tasks set to him by Sōsuke Aizen, Ulquiorra has no qualms about attacking his own allies if they impede his intent and deems anyone he finds not to be of particular interest to be "trash," and therefore expendable. The remainder of Ulquiorra's hollow mask, partially destroyed before his conversion, forms a broken helmet with a curved horn and covers the left half of his head. His hollow hole has moved since his first appearance; when first introduced it is at the base of his neck, but in later appearances, it is centered just below his collarbone.
Grimmjow Jaegerjaquez notes that Ulquiorra tends to stab opponents in the same location as his hollow hole whenever he is particularly interested in a battle, though it is unclear if Ulquiorra is conscious of this habit. Ulquiorra is very analytical: he almost accurately theorizes the means behind Orihime Inoue's abilities, and recognizes that Ichigo Kurosaki's power constantly fluctuates between very weak to greater than his own strength. He also refrains from killing a person unless necessary, twice sparing Ichigo and proclaiming he would not harm Orihime because he had not been ordered to. He can replay events he has seen to others by removing and crushing his left eye, which turns into dust and flows around those to whom Ulquiorra is relaying information. While other hollows traded defensive abilities for raw strength upon becoming arrancars, Ulquiorra maintained his high-speed regeneration abilities with only his brain and internal organs unregenerable.
When released, his zanpakutō, Murciélago (黒翼大魔（ムルシエラゴ）, Murushierago, Spanish for "Bat," kanji translates as "Giant Black-winged Demon") creates two large black bat-like wings on his back. His hollow helmet is complete and sports two large horns, while his arrancar uniform appears more form-fitting at the top, becoming robe-like towards the bottom. His release gives him extremely high speed, with Ichigo Kurosaki, a character who uses super speed himself, being unable to keep up with Ulquiorra's attacks. On this form, Ulquiorra can create "lances" of spiritual energy which he uses for both long-ranged and melee attacks; he can also use a stronger Cero variety called Cero Oscuras (黒虚閃 (セロ・オスキュラス), Sero Osukyurasu, Spanish for "Dark Zero", kanji translates as "Black Hollow Flash"); Ulquiorra claimed that all Espadas can supposedly use it upon release, but he is the only one who ever used it. Additionally, Ulquiorra is unique among the Espadas in that he has a second release, Resurrección Segunda Etapa (刀剣解放第二階層（レスレクシオン・セグンダ・エターパ）, Resurekushion Segunda Etāpa, Spanish for "Resurrection Second Stage", kanji translates as "Sword's Release: Second Level"). He becomes demonic and black-furred with clawed hands and feet, his sclera turn green, grows a long thin prehensile tail, and gains markings similar to blood flowing freely from his hollow hole. Ulquiorra's second release is said to be secret to everybody, even from Aizen. In this new form, his reiatsu lances develop flame-like tips, are dubbed as Lanza del Relámpago (雷霆の槍（ラソサ・デル・レランパーゴ）, Ransa deru Reranpāgo, Spanish for "Spear of Lightning"), and when thrown, explode upon impact; these detonations are immense enough to dwarf even the massive Las Noches, which is apparently bigger and much taller than a large city; this technique is the most destructive out of all the Espadas. While his second release makes his lances much more powerful, Ulquiorra notes that they also become difficult to control, as seen when he misses Ichigo with his first one.
Ulquiorra is one of the first arrancars to be introduced, appearing alongside Yammy Riyalgo in the real world on Aizen's orders to seek out Ichigo. The pair leaves without killing him when Ulquiorra sees Ichigo's current strength as no threat to Aizen. He does, however, remark that he is concerned over Ichigo's growth potential, stating that if he should pose a threat, then he would kill Ichigo himself. He later kidnaps Orihime for Aizen, serving as her jailer and forcing her to remain alive for Aizen's use. When Ichigo leads his group to Las Noches, Ulquiorra confronts Ichigo and provokes him into fighting. He easily withstands and defeats Ichigo's hollow form, then leaves Ichigo for dead. Much later, after escaping imprisonment by the Espada Grimmjow's Caja de Negación, Ulquiorra engages Ichigo in another battle before taking Orihime to Aizen. Entrusted to guard Las Noches while Aizen and his forces engage the Soul Reapers in the Fake Karakura Town, Ulquiorra engages Ichigo in a final battle that leads him to take their conflict above Las Noches to fight at his full power. However, thinking that he killed him, Ulquiorra unknowingly finds himself facing a semi-hollowified Ichigo with his internal organs heavily damaged. Mortally wounded, managing to get him back to normal, Ulquiorra asks Ichigo to finish him off before he dissolves and the battle between them remains unresolved. But Ichigo, not intending the fight to result in this manner refuses to. As he dies, Ulquiorra comes to understand the meaning of "heart" when an unafraid Orihime reaches out to him as his body dissolves into the wind.
He is voiced by Daisuke Namikawa in the Japanese version and by Tony Oliver in the English dub of the anime (though Steven Blum voiced him in Bleach: Shattered Blade).


==== Nnoitra GilgaEdit ====
Nnoitra Gilga (ノイトラ・ジルガ, Noitora Jiruga) is the Quinta Espada, signified by the "5" tattooed to his tongue, and previously held the Octavo Espada rank. The aspect of death he represents is despair; this is shown through his opponents losing hope because of being unable to make injuries on his body. He fights for Aizen so that he can find death in battle against a powerful opponent, and claims that the only time he feels truly alive is when he is gurgling on his own blood. He is a misogynist, and hates the idea of a woman being stronger than or outranking a man, particularly himself. Despite wanting the honor of dying a "warrior's death" and being accepted and treated as an opponent's equal in battle, he is not above using unfair methods to claim victory and will even torture and kill opponents who are already exhausted from a previous battle. He has the single fracción Tesla Lindocruz (テスラ・リンドクルズ, Tesura Rindokuruzu, romanized as Tesra Lindocruz in the Japanese media), a younger man who idolizes him, and a long-standing and vicious rivalry with former espada Nelliel Tu Oderschvank. Nnoitra wears a large eye-patch that covers most of the left side of his face, where the remnants of his hollow mask (a small set of jawbones and teeth) and his hollow hole are located.
Nnoitra has the strongest hierro of any Espada, dense enough that most attacks have little effect on him, and this makes him the most durable Espada (except for the released Yammy). His zanpakutō Santa Teresa (聖哭螳螂（サンタテレサ）, Spanish for "Mantis", kanji translates as "Sacred Crying Mantis") takes the form of a giant polearm bearing two crescent blades fused together at their backs. It is shown via several flashbacks that it used to only have one crescent. In his released state, Nnoitora gains two additional pairs of insectoid arms, and each of his hands gains an identical scythe-like weapon. Nnoitora can regenerate these extra arms.
As with the majority of the Espada, Nnoitra becomes active during Ichigo's first journey to Hueco Mundo. When he learns of the intruders, rather than staying in his quarters as ordered, he goes hunting for a good fight. After easily defeating Chad, Nnoitora goes to the site of the battle between Ichigo Kurosaki and Grimmjow Jaegerjaquez, where he intrudes on the two at the moment of Ichigo's victory. He defeats and tortures the exhausted combatants, but is prevented from murdering them by Nelliel, who, it is revealed, he had long ago dishonorably defeated and ejected from the Espada because he hates her for being ranked above him. Nelliel and Nnoitra fight, and Nelliel holds the advantage for a time, but fails to defeat Nnoitra when she reverts to her child form on the verge of triumph. Kenpachi Zaraki then arrives on the scene. Nnoitra and Kenpachi duel, both finding great enjoyment in the fact that they can survive each other's attacks. After a long and destructive battle, Nnoitra is defeated, and is granted his "warrior's death" by Kenpachi, losing consciousness a split second before his body hits the ground.
Nnoitra is voiced by Nobutoshi Canna in the Japanese anime and by Michael Sinterniklaas in the English dub.


==== Grimmjow JaegerjaquezEdit ====
Grimmjow Jaegerjaquez (グリムジョー・ジャガージャック, Gurimujō Jagājakku) is the Sexta Espada, signified by the "6" tattooed to his back. His name comes from European architect Nicholas Grimshaw and the German word for hunter. Grimmjow has a defiant, punk attitude towards authority, and can be cowed only by Sōsuke Aizen. Despite his personality, Grimmjow has a sense of honor, repays those he feels he owes a debt to, and is not willing to battle handicapped opponents. Both as an Espada and before his arrancar transformation, Grimmjow leads a close-knit gang of other hollows and dreams of becoming a hollow king himself. Grimmjow dresses in a vest over bare skin and loose pants, and sports blue hair in a style popularized by Billy Idol. A still-articulated right jawbone is all that remains of Grimmjow's hollow mask, and his hollow hole is located on his abdomen.
The aspect of death Grimmjow represents is destruction, a trait he embodies through his savage combat style and violent lust for battle. Grimmjow is a skilled fighter, able to temporarily imprison the more powerful Ulquiorra in his Caja de Negación by exploiting surprise. When his Zanpakutō Pantera (豹王（パンテラ）, Spanish for "Panther," kanji translates as "Panther King") is released he gains the physical traits of a panther, with prominent jagged teeth, feline ears, clawed hands and feet, an armored hide, and a tail that can be used as a powerful whip. His released state augments his speed and power, allows him to fire destructive darts from his elbows, and protrude immense energy claws called Desgarrón (豹王の爪（デスガロン）, Desugaron, Spanish for "Laceration," kanji translates as "Panther King's Claw") that end at his fingertips. Grimmjow can use the most powerful Cero variety out of any Espada, the Gran Rey Cero (王虚の閃光 (グラン・レイ・セロ), Guran Rei Sero, Spanish for "Grand King Zero", kanji translates as "Royal Hollow Flash"); Grimmjow and Ulquiorra claim that all Espadas can use it, but only Grimmjow did in the original manga and anime. This Cero variant is banned in Las Noches because it might threaten to destroy the palace.
Grimmjow enters the story early in the Arrancar Arc, the third Espada shown but the first to be introduced as such. He and his five fracciónes impulsively attack Ichigo Kurosaki's hometown after learning of Ichigo's power, but are defeated by the Soul Reapers stationed there, with only Grimmjow returning alive after an aborted battle with Ichigo. He is demoted and maimed for this insolence and failure, but is later healed by Orihime Inoue, and regains his rank immediately by murdering his replacement, Luppi Antenor. After his initial battle with Ichigo Kurosaki, the pair form a competitive rivalry, and he and Ichigo battle several more times, driving each other to grow stronger, until Grimmjow is decisively defeated by Ichigo in Hueco Mundo. Grimmjow survives this defeat, as well as the later Quincy invasion of Hueco Mundo, and becomes a tentative ally of the protagonists despite his desire so he can settle things with Ichigo once Yhwach is dealt with.
Grimmjow is voiced by Junichi Suwabe in the Japanese anime and by David Vincent in the English dub.


==== Luppi AntenorEdit ====
Luppi Antenor (ルピ・アンテノール, Rupi Antenōru) temporarily replaces Grimmjow Jaegerjaquez as the Sexta Espada, and has a "6" tattooed to his right hip. He has a youthful, androgynous appearance, and a condescending attitude, particularly towards his enemies and Grimmjow. The remains of his hollow mask (a top row of teeth) rest on the left side of his head, where they resemble a tiara.
Luppi's zanpakutō is Trepadora (蔦嬢（トレパドーラ）, Torepadōra, Spanish for "Vine," kanji translates as "Ivy Girl"). In his released state, eight tendrils erupt from a carapace mounted on Luppi's back, which he can control independently to fight multiple opponents. The tentacles can also grow spikes to cause additional damage.
Luppi is introduced midway through the Arrancar Arc, and serves as a minor villain and character foil to Grimmjow. He replaces the disgraced Grimmjow as 6th Espada, and along with Grimmjow, Yammy, and Wonderweiss, is sent to attack Karakura Town. Luppi fights the Soul Reapers there, and holds the upper hand until he is frozen solid by Tōshirō Hitsugaya, at which point he is forced to retreat to Hueco Mundo. On his return, Luppi is shocked to learn that his assault was merely a distraction from the abduction of Orihime Inoue. Orihime then demonstrates her healing powers to the gathered arrancars by restoring Grimmjow Jaegerjaquez's amputated arm, and Grimmjow murders Luppi to regain his Espada rank. But during the second Wandenreich invasion months later, Luppi is revived by Mayuri to assist him in his fight against Giselle.
Luppi is voiced by Daisuke Kishio in the Japanese version and by Michael Sinterniklaas in the English dub.


==== Zommari LerouxEdit ====
Zommari Leroux (ゾマリ・ルルー, Zomari Rurū, romanized as Zommari Rureaux in the Japanese media) is the Séptima Espada. He is a quiet, reverent, and pragmatic figure that despises Soul Reapers for judging hollows as evil. The aspect of death Zommari represents is intoxication, shown in his worship of Sōsuke Aizen. The remnants of his hollow mask take the form of a necklace made out of teeth and a ridge of spikes running down the center of his forehead, and his hollow hole is located on his right breast.
Zommari has the fastest sonido among the Espada, with its fastest version called Gemelos Sonido (双児響転（ヘメロス・ソニード）, Hemerosu Sonīdo, Spanish for "Sound Twins"); this is so fast that it rips his body through space, resulting in a clone. Zommari can use this to keep on producing extra bodies with a limit of a total of five bodies (including his original) at a time, thus, he has the fighting strength of up to five people, allowing him to perform tactics and techniques which can only be performed by a group, and use some of his extra bodies as decoys and replace those bodies with new ones. His zanpakutō is Brujería (呪眼僧伽（ブルヘリア）, Buruheria, Spanish for "Witchcraft," kanji translates as "Sangha of Bewitching Eyes"), which replaces his legs with a hardened lotus-like structure that he can hide within as a defensive measure. In his released state, his body is covered in eyes, each of which allows him to magically control objects or body parts using the technique Amor (愛（アモール）, Amōru, Spanish for "Love"). This technique is described by the character Byakuya Kuchiki as being similar to kidō and can be completely blocked by casting a kidō barrier.
Zommari is introduced during Ichigo's assault on Hueco Mundo, in which he is a minor villain. He obediently holds back from battle until after Rukia Kuchiki defeats Aaroniero Arruruerie. Zomarri then takes the field in order to finish off the unconscious Rukia, but is prevented from doing so by Byakuya Kuchiki. The two fight, at first relying on their super-speed but then turning to their zanpakutō releases. Using his Amor, Zommari attempts to dominate Byakuya's body, but is unsuccessful when Byakuya cripples his own limbs to prevent them being used against him. Zommari is then assaulted by Byakuya's bankai, which he is incapable of dominating due to its hundreds of pieces. Zommari remained safe by hiding in his defense, and attempts to use Amor on Byakuya, but Byakuya had observed the technique's resemblance to kidō, and creates magical wall to render it ineffective. Zommari, despite knowing it is already useless, impatiently and desperately uses Amor on Byakuya, who uses Shunpo to instantly move to the location behind Zommari. As Byakuya raises his sword to deliver the finishing blow, Zommari heartfully shouts his final praise to Aizen before meeting his death.
Zommari is voiced by Taiten Kusunoki in the Japanese anime. In the English dub, he is voiced by Greg Eagles up until episode 195, and Neil Kaplan thereafter.


==== Szayelaporro GrantzEdit ====
Szayelaporro Grantz (ザエル・アポロ・グランツ, Zaeru Aporo Gurantsu, romanized as Szayel Apollo Granz in the Japanese media) is the Octava Espada. The aspect of death he represents is madness, which is displayed through his "mad scientist" personality. The remains of his hollow mask take the form of rectangular-framed glasses, and his hollow hole is located in his groin. He thinks highly of himself and often follows his plans down to the finest detail. He is quite sadistic and views others as little more than research material (a characteristic he shares with Mayuri Kurotsuchi), thinking poorly of non-hollows with the hope that Aizen would wipe them all out. Previously, he lost a position as an Espada and was forced to aid Nnoitora to take out Nelliel to regain his membership in the order. Szayelaporro has a variety of methods for analyzing an opponent's abilities, such as studying the damage done to their former opponents using parasites that serve like cameras. Once doing so, Szayelaporro can nullify the effects of their abilities, making him virtually immune to their attacks. In addition to the immunities gained from studying his opponents, Szayelaporro has a large number of Fracciones which were originally hollows whom he experimented on and personally modified so that he can heal his wounds by eating them.
His Zanpakutō is called Fornicarás (邪淫妃（フォルニカラス）, Forunikarasu, Spanish for "You will fornicate," kanji translates as "Lewd Princess"); La Lujuriosa in the English dub（ラルフリオサ）Ra Ruhuriosa, Spanish for "The Lustful," and in his released state he grows two pairs of long tentacles on his back; twelve teardrop-shaped sacs dangle from each tentacle like fruits. He can shoot a shower of purple liquids from his body and with each droplet that comes into contact with an opponent a doppelganger of that enemy is created; each clone has the same abilities as the original, but they are extremely weak and can be instantly defeated by the real one, however each clone splits into more clones upon destruction, and will disappear when Szayelaporro is killed or when Szayelaporro willingly cancels the ability. By using his tentacles to drain nutrients from his opponents, Szayelaporro can create voodoo dolls of them. Each doll can open up to reveal toys which represent internal organs, the destruction of which would do major debilitating damage to the victim from the inside. The ability he prides the most, Gabriel (受胎告知（ガブリエール）, Gaburiēru, kanji translates as "the Annunciation"), allows him to be reborn if he is injured beyond repair by impregnating an enemy and absorbing their spirit particles, turning them into his own and killing the victim in the process while his previous body, if devoured, breaks down into cells that fuse into the eater's nervous system, allowing him to gain complete control.
Prior to his introduction, Szayelaporro sends Rudobone to bring him any defeated arrancars in order to analyze the abilities of those who defeated them. Szayelaporro later engages Renji Abarai in battle, revealing himself as the younger brother of Ilfort Grantz whom Renji killed. Revealing that he had analyzed data on Renji's attacks through the insects he laced on Ilfort's body prior, Szayelaporro had the advantage over the Soul Reaper before unleashing his Fracción Medazeppi on him. Though Uryū Ishida arrives to aid him, Szayelaporro eventually nullifies Uryū's abilities as well from studying Cirucci's corpse. He toys with the two for a time, but when his domain is destroyed in the fight, a vexed Szalyelaporro decides to personally finish them off despite Pesche and Dondochakka's attempted surprise attack. However, Kurotsuchi arrives to help them and is able to render all of Szayelaporro's abilities useless. After he is killed by Mayuri's bankai, Szayelaporro reconstitutes himself through Nemu Kurotsuchi (whom he had taken hostage), ingesting a large dosage of one of the experimental drugs stored inside Nemu's body in the process. The drug, a "Superhuman Potion", increases his reaction time to the point where one second seems like a century to him. With his physical body unable to compensate for his over-enhanced mental state, Szayelaporro is effectively paralyzed and left to suffer an agonizing death from his perspective by Mayuri shortly after.
Much later, a hallucination of Szayelaporro appears before Mayuri to taunt the Soul Reaper during his battle with Pernida Parkngjas as he watches Nemu being killed by the Quincy.
He is voiced by Kōsuke Toriumi in the Japanese version, and voiced by Hank Matthews in the earlier appearances of the English dub and by Ben Diskin in later versions of the English dub.


==== Aaroniero ArruruerieEdit ====
Aaroniero Arruruerie (アーロニーロ・アルルエリ, Āronīro Arurueri) is the Novena Espada, signified by the "9" tattooed on his two faces. The aspect of death he represents is greed. In place of a head, Aaroniero has a pair of infantile skull-like creatures which float inside a glass capsule filled with red liquid, which is usually covered with a tall white mask. The two skulls speak alternately (the top skull speaks with a deep voice, whereas the bottom one speaks with a childlike voice), often finishing each other's sentences, and refer to themselves as "we", suggesting that Aaroniero is, to some degree, two separate beings.
Aaroniero is introduced as one of the last first-generation Espadas as well as the only Gillian member of the current Espadas. But in spite of being a Gillian, Aaroniero is made an Espada due to his unique talent of devouring other hollows through his tendril-like Zanpakutō, Glotonería (喰虚（グロトネリア）, Gurotoneria, Spanish for "Gluttony," kanji translates as "Eating Hollow"), a deformed mouthed appendage in place of his left arm which he usually covers with his robes and a glove. Compared to regular Gillians, Aaroniero can completely incorporate those he consumes into himself, giving him access to their memories and special abilities and even allowing him to shapeshift into their physical form if he so desires. Exposure to sunlight, however, nullifies his powers and forces him back into his original form if he was shapeshifted.
At the time of his appearance, Aaroniero claims to have absorbed 33,650 hollows. Although the full range of his acquired abilities is never shown, they include "synchronized awareness", an ability to project any information and thoughts to his allies' minds, and (through a series of events which culminated with the consumption of the hollow Metastacia) the powers, memories and form of Soul Reaper Kaien Shiba. Furthermore, his zanpakutō release transforms his lower body into a purple, house-sized octopus-like mass with dozens of tentacles and cartoonish mouth-like mask pieces. With Glotonería released, Aaroniero can access the full range of his acquired abilities at will.
After Ichigo and his friends break into Hueco Mundo, Aaroniero seeks out Rukia and, in the guise of Kaien Shiba, attempts to use Rukia's guilt at Kaien's death to trick her first into allowing him to kill her. However, when he almost attempts to trick her into killing her friends, Rukia senses something is amiss and engages him. Though eventually unmasked, Aaroniero reveals that he was not merely shapeshifted, but actually in control of Kaien's spirit body. As she believes that she had freed Kaien Shiba by killing him those many years before, Aaroniero's revelation shatters Rukia's resolve, enabling Aaroniero to overpower and wound her with his own released zanpakutō. Before he can kill her, however, Rukia, spurned on by memories of Kaien, retaliates by stabbing Aaroniero through his upper skull, shattering his glass capsule and reducing the rest of his body to liquid. As he dies, broadcasting his final moments to his allies, Aaroniero's lower skull screams for Aizen's help while the upper skull merely curses Rukia, refusing to accept his defeat, before splitting in half and then dissolving into a purple fluid.
Toshihiko Seki voices both skulls in the Japanese version. In the English dub, Keith Silverstein voices the top skull and Wendee Lee voices the bottom skull while Dave Mallow voices Aaroniero's guise as Kaien Shiba.


=== Privaron EspadaEdit ===

The Privaron Espadas (十刃落ち（プリバロン・エスパーダ）, Puribaron Esupāda, Spanish for "Deprived Sword," kanji translates as "Fallen from the Ten Blades") are arrancars that were once Espadas yet were demoted out of either being a disgrace to the group or replaced by the artificially-created arrancars Aizen created with the Hōgyoku. They have received a three-digit number in order to separate them from the regular arrancars since their power is still far above average.


==== Dordoni Alessandro Del SocaccioEdit ====
Arrancar 103 Dordoni Alessandro Del Socaccio (ドルドーニ・アレッサンドロ・デル・ソカッチオ, Dorudōni Aressandoro Deru Sokatchio) is goofier when compared to other Espadas; however, he is much more serious in battle. During his battle with Ichigo Kurosaki, Dordoni tries to goad Ichigo into using his Bankai and hollow mask, hoping to earn his former position back by defeating Ichigo at full power. He is defeated once Ichigo complies, and thanks Ichigo for the favor by fighting against the Exequias to buy Ichigo time to escape, dying by their hands with his final thoughts that Ichigo should discard his kindness while fighting future opponents. His death was later reported to Aizen to be the work of the intruders. But during the second Wandenreich invasion months later, Dordoni is revived by Mayuri to assist him in his fight against Giselle.
Dordoni's zanpakutō is Giralda (暴風男爵（ヒラルダ）, Hiraruda, kanji translates as "Storm Baron"), and in his released state, Dordoni grows armor that starts at his feet, wraps around his calves, and juts out at his waist with two more spikes. While released, two enormous cyclones come from exhaust spouts on the armor covering his legs, which keeps him hovering in the air and add extra force to his kicks. In addition, two beak-like extensions jut out from these cyclones, which are used to execute long-range strikes, though Dordoni is also capable of manifesting many more if the need arises.
He is voiced by Kōji Ishii in the Japanese version and by Peter Spellos in the English dub.


==== Cirucci SanderwicciEdit ====
Arrancar 105 Cirucci Sanderwicci (チルッチ・サンダーウィッチ, Chirutchi Sandāwitchi) has an appearance similar to a gothic lolita; her outfit consists of a frilly dress, large, round sleeves that cut off at her shoulder, short purple-colored hair, teardrop markings on each cheek, and knee-high boots. The remains of her hollow mask are positioned in her hair right above the left side of her forehead and resemble a spiked hairpin. Despite her rather odd appearance, she has no qualms about pointing out when others have similar fashion, as she does to Uryū Ishida. She also follows a soldier-like ideology.
Her zanpakutō, Golondrina (車輪鉄燕（ゴロンドリーナ）, Gorondorīna, Spanish for "Swallow," kanji translates as "Wheeled Steel Swallow"), takes the form of a whip with a large, spinning, Yo-Yo like disk looped into it. When released, Cirucci's arms become longer with claws at the end as she sprouts large wings with ten moon-shaped blades in place of feathers. These blades vibrate at a high frequency, making an audible humming noise in the anime. Cirucci can remove these blades and fire them through the air or summon them back at her own will.
Her released state rapidly consumes her spiritual energy, which Uryū took advantage of before she discarded her released state arms and wings, focusing her spirit energy into a luminous pink blade at the tip of her head crest's tail. But Uryū still defeats her, sealing away her power. Even though letting her live may come as an insult to Cirucci, Uryū spares her life with the inability to get revenge on him. But no sooner did he leave than the Exequias arrive and kill her, taking her corpse to Szayelaporro for research. But during the second Wandenreich invasion months later, Cirucci is revealed to have been revived by Mayuri as she assists him in his fight against Giselle.
She is voiced by Hōko Kuwashima in the Japanese version and by Tricia Pierce in the English dub.


==== Gantenbainne MosquedaEdit ====
Arrancar 107 Gantenbainne Mosqueda (ガンテンバイン・モスケーダ, Gantenbain Mosukēda) has an afro-style haircut with thick sideburns and a goatee. The remains of his hollow mask are a sunglasses-shaped plate on his forehead with four teeth coming out above each eye.
Gantenbainne's Zanpakutō, Dragra (龍拳（ドラグラ）, Doragura, kanji translates as "Dragon Fist"), takes the form of a pair of two-pronged punching daggers attached to Gantenbainne's wrists by hinges. In its released state, Gantenbainne's arms grow longer and become covered in dome-shaped armor plates, and the punching daggers come to resemble dragon heads. Similar plates also extend down his back and form a tail. He pulls his mask fragment over his eyes at certain points in combat. When attacking, he can shoot various blasts from his fists.
After Yasutora Sado defeats him, Gantenbainne is spared in thanks for fighting at his full strength while risking defeat. As Chad leaves, Nnoitora Gilga appears wanting to fight the first person to make it out of the domain of the Privaron Espadas. Gantenbainne tells Chad to escape, but Chad attacks Nnoitora and is defeated with a single blow. After Nnoitora senses Ichigo and leaves, the unconscious Chad and Gantenbainne are found by the Exequias. Retsu Unohana intervenes before they can be killed, and heals Chad and Mosqueda's wounds after Rudobone decides to leave and not attack any of them. Gatenbainne's current fate is unknown, but he is most likely that he is still alive.
He is voiced by Masato Funaki in the Japanese version and by Greg Eagles in the English dub.


=== OtherEdit ===
The following are those recurring arrancars that have never received a position as, and are not direct subordinates of, an Espada.


==== Rudbornn CheluteEdit ====
Arrancar 61 Rudbornn Chelute (ルドボーン, Rudobōn) is the leader of the Exequias (葬討部隊 (エクセキアス), Ekusekiasu, Spanish for "Funeral Rites", kanji translates as "Funerary Attacking Force"), a group responsible for dealing with rebels and intruders in Las Noches. Unlike most arrancars, his face is completely hidden by his mask. He and his subordinates clean up after each battle, collecting data for Szayelaporro Grantz before killing any survivors.
He carries a Zanpakutō with the name Arbol (髑髏樹 (アルボラ), Arubora, Spanish for "Tree," kanji translates as "Skull Tree"), which in his released state grants him tree limbs that twist around his body, adorned with skulls at the tips. Rudbornn is capable of balancing on top of these tree limbs. From these branches, Rudbornn gains the ability to generate full-bodied minions with skulls for masks, which he refers to as his Calaveras (カラベラス, Karaberasu, Spanish for "Skull"). These calaveras apparently comprise the entirety of the Exequias, thereby making Rudbornn the only real Exequias member. Rudbornn has expressed disappointment and regret that he was unable to achieve the role of Espada, despite his powerful ability. Regardless, he expresses great pride and confidence in the Espadas that Aizen has chosen and his own ability to create an endless army of soldiers.
Rudbornn carries out his duties for Szayelaporro by killing off two of the Privaron Espadas after they lose their respective fights. As he begins to do the same with the third he is stopped by Retsu Unohana. Surprised by the arrival of a Soul Reaper Captain, Rudbornn withdraws in order to avoid conflict. Later, he and his Calaveras attempt to prevent Ichigo Kurosaki from reaching Orihime Inoue and Ulquiorra Schiffer, only to find himself fighting Rukia Kuchiki. Though he overwhelmed her with the endless number of calaveras he produces in his released state, Rudbornn is subsequently defeated when the distraction by Yasutora Sado and Renji Abarai allowed Rukia to use her shikai to freeze him so his branches would wither. However, as Rubbornn is completely encased in ice, he is shattered with the punch of an enraged Yammy. His current fate is unknown but he is most likely dead.
He is voiced by Taro Yamaguchi in Japanese and in English by Michael Lindsay in Episode 153, by Doug Erholtz in Episode 157, by Ben Diskin in Episode 195, and by Dan Woren in Episode 196 onwards.


==== Wonderweiss MergeraEdit ====
Arrancar 77 Wonderweiss Mergera (ワンダーワイス・マルジェラ, Wandāwaisu Marujera, romanized as Wonderweiß Margela in the Japanese media) is a modified arrancar with reiatsu density comparable to the current Espadas. The remains of his hollow mask resembles a small crown on his head. Modified by Aizen using the Hōgyoku as a weapon to render Yamamoto's Zanpakutō completely useless, the process removed all forms of Wonderweiss' rationality, his memory retention, speech, and intelligence. As a result, despite being all-powerful, Wonderweiss is intellectually disabled. He possesses a level of hostility, firing a bala towards Kisuke Urahara during their battle, but quickly reverts to his regular state after doing so. Kaname Tōsen states that Wonderweiss (like himself) is a pure being, but wonders whether he is pure good or evil. He follows Tōsen everywhere when possible and is hostile to what he perceives as Tōsen's enemies.
Wonderweiss' own zanpakutō Extinguir (滅火皇子 (エスティンギル), Esutingiru, Spanish for "To Extinguish," kanji translates as "Prince of Extinguished Flames") resembles a purple-colored claymore or zweihander. In his released form, Wonderweiss appears to have giant shoulders and thighs, skinny limbs, and a large crown-like headpiece. Upon contact he instantly extinguishes and absorbs Ryūjin Jakka's flames into his body. Furthermore, his strength is highly augmented, he is capable of instant-regeneration, and can produce numerous arms from his shoulders and back that can extend to great lengths.
Shortly after his creation, Wonderweiss is sent to the human world with the Espadas Grimmjow, Luppi, and Yammy to engage and distract the Soul Reapers while Ulquiorra captures Orihime. He later appears during Aizen's assault on Karakura Town leading a massive hollow called Hooler, impaling Jushiro Ukitake with his bare hands, and then freeing Halibel from Tōshirō Hitsugaya's ice prison with a sonic scream. Despite engaging Kensei in battle after eventually overwhelming Mashiro when she killed Hooler, Wonderweiss reappears to save Aizen from Yamamoto's suicide attempt and engages the Captain-Commander in a hand-to-hand battle. He is ultimately killed and shattered to pieces by Yamamoto's Sōkotsu technique; however, having sealed all Ryūjin Jakka's flames into his body prior to their fight, Wonderweiss' corpse explodes and Yamamoto is forced to throw himself onto Wonderweiss' body to prevent the release of the absorbed flames from incinerating the entire town.
He is voiced in the Japanese version by Hisayoshi Suganuma and in the English version by Christopher Corey Smith, until episode 278 when replaced by Michael Sinterniklaas.


==== Loly Aivirrne and Menoly MalliaEdit ====
Loly Aivirrne (ロリ・アイヴァーン, Rori Aivān) and Menoly Mallia (メノリ・マリア, Menori Maria) are a pair of female arrancars, Arrancar 33 and 34 respectively, that antagonize Orihime Inoue during the "Hueco Mundo" and "Fake Karakura Town" arcs. Loly, who hates Orihime out of both envy and later fearful prejudice, appears as an arrogant young woman with black hair tied in pigtails, a short schoolgirl-themed skirt, and the remains of her mask surround her left eye socket. The remains of Menoly's mask surrounds her right eye socket, and she appears to be more reasonable and willing to cope with her jealousy than to risk her life by making trouble.
Loly's Zanpakutō is Escolopendra (百刺毒娼（エスコロペンドラ, Esukoropendora, Spanish for "Centipede," kanji translates as "Hundred Poisonous Stings") which takes the form of a small dagger with a curved guard. When released, Loly gains centipede-like appendages on her arms which erode everything they touch.
Serving Sōsuke Aizen personally, Loly and Menoly were assigned to guard the room Orihime was placed in, the two expressing jealousy of his interest in Orihime. Taking advantage of her rescuers' distraction, Loly and Menoly use the moment to put Orihime in her place. However, when Orihime stood up to them, Loly took it personally and was about to kill her when Grimmjow arrived and mortally wounded Menoly while beating Loly to an inch of her life. However, Orihime used her power to heal the two with Loly's jealousy becoming fearful prejudice. Though Menoly was reluctant to go through with it once Aizen revealed the girl outlived her usefulness, Loli was bent on killing Orihime in the most tormenting way possible during Ichigo's fight with Ulquiorra. However, the sudden arrival of Yammy, who is denied from teaming up with Ulquiorra, results in Menoly being knocked into a pillar. After being healed again by Orihime, deciding to fight Yammy so not to be feel obligated, Loly releases her Zanpakutō with the intent to kill him and Ulquiorra. However, Loly is defeated and thrown through the tower wall while being saved by one of Uryū's arrows.
Following the Wandenreich's conquest of Hueco Mundo, Loly and Menoly allowed themselves to be captured so they can take a shot at Kirge Opie. But the assassination plot failed and the two are brutally beaten by Kirge's subordinates with orders for them not to be killed. However, though Loly was mortified by it, she and Menoly were placed in Orihime's care.
Loly and Menoly are voiced respectively by Hana Takeda and Hitomi Harada in the Japanese version and by Colleen O'Shaughnessey and Wendee Lee in the English dub.


== ReceptionEdit ==
The hollows of Bleach have received praise from several publications for anime, manga, and other media. Anime News Network praised Kubo's "grasp of character and storytelling" in his creation of hollows who are not "the average monster of the week", but have "strong emotional ties" to their victims. Meanwhile, the later introduced arrancars are described as conceptually interesting.
Of the hollow characters, the Espada character Grimmjow has garnered the most attention, with ActiveAnime describing him as "the most psycho of them all". Additionally, IGN commented that "it's very difficult to take a book seriously when one of its main characters is named "Grimmjow Jeager-Jacques" [sic] but damned if this book doesn't pull it off". In contrast, Anime News Network lamented that the first battle between Ichigo and Grimmjow was "a lumbering, inelegant mess". Grimmjow is also the most popular hollow character with readers of Weekly Shōnen Jump, placing fourth in its fourth Bleach Popularity contest. Ulquiorra, another arrancar character, was voted into tenth place in the same poll, though he had also appeared in the previous poll in twentieth place.
The visual appearances of the hollows in the anime and manga have also received notice from reviewers. The Los Angeles Times compared the early hollows to "the misshapen fossils of unsuccessful dinosaurs". Of the arrancar characters, Yammy is described as a "stereotypical, muscle-bound anime villain", while Ulquiorra is likened to "L from Death Note, with a bone hat and some tear makeup".


== ReferencesEdit ==