SAP Business Warehouse SAP Business Warehouse (also known as SAP NetWeaver Business Warehouse or SAP BW) is the cornerstone of SAP’s strategic Enterprise Data Warehouse solutions and runs on industry standard RDBMS and SAP's HANA in-memory DBMS. It delivers reporting, analysis, and interpretation of business data that is crucial to preserve and enhance the competitive edge of companies by optimizing processes and enabling them to react quickly to meet market opportunity. In SAP BW, you can integrate, transform, and consolidate relevant business information from productive SAP applications and external data sources. SAP BW provides you with a high-performance infrastructure that helps you evaluate and interpret data. Decision makers can make well-founded decisions and identify target-oriented activities on the basis of the analyzed data.


== History ==
In 1998, SAP released the first version SAP BW providing a model-driven approach to EDW which made data warehousing easier and more efficient for SAP R3 data. Over the past 16 years SAP BW has evolved to become a key component for tens of thousands of companies EDW. The following article provides the history of SAP BW from inception to the new release powered by SAP HANA.


== External links ==
SAP Business Warehouse Developer Community
SAP Business Warehouse Documentation
openSAP Business Warehouse powered by SAP HANA Course


== In-Memory Data Fabric ==
SAP’s revolutionary approach streamlines and simplifies Data Warehousing into an In-Memory Data Fabric[1](IMDF) - providing greater speed and scale along with agility for development and efficiency that reduces data movement and data preparation. With SAP’s complete In-Memory Data Fabric architecture you gain the ability to: • Simplify: Reduce the work of managing and maintaining the warehouse—Eliminate staging databases, pre-computations, and artificial structures • Accelerate: Real-time response time regardless of data volume or data location; manage and integrate massive volumes of data • Predict: Predict trends, needs, and customer behavior to get the insights you need to stay ahead of your competition This modular EDW approach integrates SAP HANA, SAP BW, SAP IQ, SAP ESP and SAP Data Services.


== References ==
1. http://www.sap.com/pc/tech/data-warehousing.html