"A Colder War" is an English-language, alternate history novelette by Charles Stross written c. 1997.
The story fuses the Cold War and the Cthulhu Mythos by exploring the consequences of a follow-up to the expedition in H. P. Lovecraft's At the Mountains of Madness. Although the story has similarity to the later Stross novel The Atrocity Archives, they are set in different universes. Teresa Nielsen Hayden describes the story on Making Light as "It's the Oliver North/Guns for Hostages scandal, seen from the viewpoint of a CIA bureaucrat, in a universe in which the entire Cthulhu Mythos is real."
It was one of Locus Online's 2000 'Recommended Reading' novelettes.


== Publication historyEdit ==
The story originally appeared in Spectrum SF No. 3 in 2000, being later reprinted in Gardner Dozois's The Year's Best Science Fiction #18 and in Stross' collections Toast: And Other Rusted Futures (in 2002) and Wireless (2009). In late 2011 it appeared in two Cthulhu-themed anthologies: The Book of Cthulhu by Night Shade Books (ISBN 1597802328) and New Cthulhu: The Recent Weird by Prime Books (ISBN 1607012898).


== Plot synopsisEdit ==
The Soviet Union has developed a superweapon called Project Koschei for use against NATO. Located at Chernobyl, Koschei is based on captured Nazi German research into an underwater city in the Baltic Sea. The Soviets have also deployed smaller weapons called servitors, as found in the Kitab Al-Azif, in their occupation of Afghanistan.
Doing so violates the Dresden Agreement, a secret multinational treaty signed in 1931 after an expedition to a strange Antarctic plateau that appears on no maps. Even Adolf Hitler adhered to the treaty, which hides the existence of the supernatural entities from the public and prohibits their use in war.
The United States' countermeasures for Koschei include 300 megatons of nuclear weapons and a continuity of government base hundreds of light years from Earth. American research also indicates that all intelligent species that experiment with the entities exterminate themselves. Other nations emulate the superpowers; Iran and Israel plan a nuclear defence against Iraq's attempts to open a gate to the stars.
As a Congressional committee examines American co-operation with Iran's plans, the Soviets and their leader Yegor Ligachev unexpectedly over-react to a joke by President Reagan, with dire results: Saddam Hussein stabilises the gate of Yog-Sothoth, destroying all opposing tribes in Iraq, which the Iranians respond by nuking Baghdad; in retaliation, an unknown Russian general launches the entire Russian arsenal aimed at the Middle East; when discussing it with a CIA agent, an American official remarks, "Scratch the Middle East, period—everything from the Nile to the Khyber Pass is toast."
The increasing nuclear exchange eventually wakes Cthulhu (which is the actual entity behind Project Koschei), which shrugs off the entire nuclear arsenal aimed at it and proceeds towards the U.S, annihilating all of Europe in the progress. Information flow across NATO grinds to a halt, as Cthulhu's influence silences and warps all communications. The remaining U.S personnel retreat to a hidden constructed colony on a distant planet, codenamed XK Masada.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
"A Colder War"
A Colder War title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database