Agnes of Rome (c. 291 – c. 304) is a virgin–martyr, venerated as a saint in the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, the Anglican Communion, and Lutheranism. She is one of seven women, who along with the Blessed Virgin, are commemorated by name in the Canon of the Mass. She is the patron saint of chastity, gardeners, girls, engaged couples, rape survivors, virgins, and the Children of Mary.
Agnes is depicted in art with a lamb, as the Latin word for "lamb", agnus, sounds like her name. The name "Agnes" is actually derived from the feminine Greek adjective hagnē (ἁγνή) meaning "chaste, pure, sacred".
Agnes' feast day is 21 January. In pre-1970 versions of the General Roman Calendar an additional feast of the same saint is given one week later, on 28 January (see Tridentine Calendar). The 1969 revision removed this as a duplication of the 21 January feast.


== NameEdit ==
While the name "Agnes" resembles the Latin agnus ("lamb"), it is actually derived from the feminine Greek adjective "hagnē" (ἁγνή) meaning "chaste, pure, sacred".


== BiographyEdit ==
According to tradition, Agnes was a member of the Roman nobility born 291 AD and raised in a Christian family. She suffered martyrdom at the age of twelve or thirteen during the reign of the Roman Emperor Diocletian, on 21 January 304.
Agnes was a beautiful young girl of wealthy family and therefore had many suitors of high rank. Details of her story are unreliable, but legend holds that the young men, slighted by her resolute devotion to religious purity, submitted her name to the authorities as a follower of Christianity.
The Prefect Sempronius condemned Agnes to be dragged naked through the streets to a brothel. Various versions of the legend give different methods of escape from this predicament. In one, as she prayed, her hair grew and covered her body. It was also said that all of the men who attempted to rape her were immediately struck blind. In another the son of the prefect is struck dead, but revived after she prayed for him, causing her release. There is then a trial from which Sempronius excuses himself, and another figure presides, sentencing her to death. When led out to die she was tied to a stake, but the bundle of wood would not burn, or the flames parted away from her, whereupon the officer in charge of the troops drew his sword and beheaded her, or, in some other texts, stabbed her in the throat. It is also said that her blood poured to the stadium floor where other Christians soaked it up with cloths.

Agnes was buried beside the Via Nomentana in Rome. A few days after her death, her foster-sister, Saint Emerentiana, was found praying by her tomb; she claimed to be the daughter of Agnes' wet nurse, and was stoned to death after refusing to leave the place and reprimanding the pagans for killing her foster sister. Emerentiana was also later canonized. The daughter of Constantine I, Saint Constance, was also said to have been cured of leprosy after praying at Agnes' tomb. She and Emerentiana appear in the scenes from the life of Agnes on the 14th-century Royal Gold Cup in the British Museum.
An early account of Agnes' death, stressing her young age, steadfastness and virginity, but not the legendary features of the tradition, is given by Saint Ambrose.


== VenerationEdit ==
Agnes's bones are conserved beneath the high altar in the church of Sant'Agnese fuori le mura in Rome, built over the catacomb that housed her tomb. Her skull is preserved in a separate chapel in the church of Sant'Agnese in Agone in Rome's Piazza Navona.


== PatronageEdit ==
Agnes is the patron saint of young girls. Folk custom called for them to practise rituals on Saint Agnes' Eve (20–21 January) with a view to discovering their future husbands. This superstition has been immortalised in John Keats's poem, "The Eve of Saint Agnes".


=== ChurchesEdit ===

Saint Agnes' Parish in Belfast, Ireland of the Diocese of Down and Connor
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Naples, Florida
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Arlington, Virginia
Sant'Agnese in Agone
Sant'Agnese fuori le mura
Church of St Agnes, Cornwall, England
St. Agnes' Church, New York City
St. Agnes Church, Brooklyn, New York
Mission Santa Inés, Solvang, California
St. Agnes Catholic Church, San Francisco, California
St. Agnes Catholic Church, San Diego, California
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Charleston, West Virginia
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
St. Agnes Parish, Roeland Park, Kansas
St. Agnes Parish, Springfield, Illinois
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Hubbard, Oregon
St. Agnes Church, Little Village, Chicago, Illinois
St. Agnes Anglican Parish, Grants Town, New Providence
Parish of St. Agnes Cathedral, Rockville Centre, New York
St. Agnes Catholic Church (Our Lady of Hope Parish), Blackwood, New Jersey
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Concord, California
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Morrisdale, Pennsylvania
St. Agnes Catholic Church, St. Paul, Minnesota
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Phoenix, Arizona
St. Agnes Parish Almar, Caloocan, Philippines
St. Agnes Mission, Mirando City, Texas
St. Agnes Catholic Church, West Chester, Pennsylvania
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Baltimore, Maryland
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Waterloo, Ontario
St. Agnes Roman Catholic Church, Eight Mile Rock, Grand Bahama, Bahamas
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Nashville, Indiana
St. Agnes Anglican Church, Kloof, South Africa
St. Agnes Catholic Church, Kibuye-Makindye


=== SchoolsEdit ===
St. Agnes Catholic School, Roeland Park, Kansas
St. Agnes Catholic School, Arlington, Virginia
St. Agnes Catholic Grade School, Charleston, West Virginia
St. Agnes Catholic School, Springfield, Illinois
St. Agnes Elementary School, Ft. Wright, Kentucky
St. Agnes Convent School - Mumbai, India
St. Agnes Convent School - Howrah, India
St. Agnes Catholic School, St. Paul, Minnesota
St. Agnes Academy - Houston, Texas
St Agnes Catholic Grade School, Louisville, Kentucky
St. Agnes Cathedral School, Rockville Centre, New York
St. Agnes Girl's School, Balangoda, Sri Lanka
St. Agnes Catholic School, Los Angeles, California
St. Agnes Catholic Elementary School, Phoenix, Arizona
St. Agnes Catholic Elementary School, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
St. Agnes School, Concord, California
St. Agnes School, Kharagpur, West Bengal, India
St. Agnes School, Towanda, Pennsylvania
St. Agnes School, Cervantes, Ilocos Sur, Philippines
St. Agnes Catholic School, West Chester, Pennsylvania
St. Agnes School, Baltimore, Maryland
St. Agnes Academy, Memphis, Tennessee
St. Agnes Academic High School, College Point, New York
St. Agnes Academy, Legazpi City, Philippines
St. Agnes Academy, Key Biscayne, Florida
St. Agnes Girls School, Mangalore, Karnataka


== LegacyEdit ==
The Congregation of Sisters of St. Agnes is a Roman Catholic religious community for women based in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin. It was founded in 1858, by Father Caspar Rehrl, an Austrian missionary, who established the sisterhood of pioneer women under Agnes' patronage, to whom he had a particular devotion.
It is customary on her feast day for two lambs to be brought from the Trappist abbey of Tre Fontane in Rome to be blessed by the Pope. On Holy Thursday they are shorn, and from the wool is woven the pallium which the pope gives to a newly consecrated metropolitan archbishop as a sign of his jurisdiction and his union with the pope.


== IconographyEdit ==
Since the Middle Ages, Agnes has been represented with a lamb, the symbol of her virginal innocence, and often also, like other martyrs, with a palm branch. She is represented as a young girl in robes, holding a palm branch in her hand with a lamb at her feet or in her arms.


== In popular cultureEdit ==
Hrotsvitha, the tenth-century nun and poetess, wrote a play the subject of which was Agnes. Grace Andreacchi wrote a play based on the legends surrounding her martyrdom.
In the historical novel Fabiola or, the Church of the Catacombs, written by Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman in 1854, Agnes is the soft-spoken teenage cousin and confidant of the protagonist, the beautiful noblewoman Fabiola.


== GalleryEdit ==


== See alsoEdit ==
List of Catholic saints


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
"St Agnes - St Peter's Square Colonnade Saints"
Satucket.com, St. Agnes of Rome
Blogspot.com, St Agnes in literature
"Saint Agnes" at the Christian Iconography website
"Of Saint Agnes" from the Caxton translation of the Golden Legend
Remarks on the feast of St. Agnes from St. Ambrose of Milan, On Virgins
Saint Agnes - The patron saint of young girls.