Redbank Power Station is located near Singleton, in the Hunter Region, New South Wales, Australia. It was coal powered with one steam driven turbo generator with a capacity of 151 MW of electricity.
Originally Redbank Power Station was promoted as being at the cutting edge of environmental technology, but has been criticised by environmentalists for producing more CO2 than other types of coal-fired power station. The first stage of the Redbank project was taken to the Land and Environment Court in 1994 over claims by environmentalists that it did not meet its own standards. The claim was dismissed by the court.
Redbank pumped its cooling water from the Hunter River.
Redbank was fuelled by beneficiated, dewatered tailings from the Mount Thorley Warkworth mine at Warkworth, delivered by conveyor. In lay terms this is the part of the coal waste which would otherwise not be utilised, and simply buried as the mines progress.
According to Carbon Monitoring for Action (CARMA), in 2007 Redbank emitted more climate change and global warming causing greenhouse gases per unit of electricity generated than any other power station in Australia. However no data from the actual plant, operator or Australian Government is actually used to base these approximate assumptions on. CARMA uses a statistical model that predicts CO2 emissions given the size, age, fuel type, estimated capacity utilization, and engineering specifications of individual plants.
Carbon Monitoring for Action estimates this power station emits 1.06 million tonnes of greenhouse gases each year as a result of burning coal. The Australian Government has announced the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme commencing in 2010 to help combat climate change. It is expected to impact on emissions from power stations. The National Pollutant Inventory provides details of other pollutant emissions, but, as at 23 November 2008, not CO2.
In 2013 Redbank went into receivership, with debts of $192 million.
In Oct 2014, receivers KordaMentha announced immediate closure of the Plant with its remaining assets including the turbine, generator and plant and equipment to be sold.


== References ==


== External links ==
Redbank Power (Discontinued Website)
http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2003/05/19/1053196531708.html 20 May 2003