Eudora is a female character in the Peanuts comic strip by Charles M. Schulz. She was the last major character to join the Peanuts world. She has long, straight black hair and usually wears a knitted hat. Eudora moved to Charlie Brown's neighborhood from another state, though which state was never specified.


== HistoryEdit ==
The first other Peanuts character Eudora met was Sally, on the bus to summer camp on June 13, 1978. Eudora then showed up in Sally's class at the school that fall. The two girls quickly became friends, and became even better friends when Eudora moved into Sally's neighborhood. However, Sally gets angry at Eudora, when she is able to charm Linus, into giving her his blanket, since she has a crush on Linus herself. Eudora gives the blanket to Snoopy's nemesis, the "stupid cat who lives next door," and it takes the combined forces of Linus, Snoopy and Woodstock to get the blanket back.
Sally gets upset with Eudora whenever she shows feelings toward Linus, as when Eudora calls Linus her "Sweet Babboo", a name by which Sally commonly calls the boy.
In some strips Eudora appears to be even more ditzy than Sally, such as when she tries to give a book report on the TV Guide and coming to school on Saturdays without realizing what day it is.
Eudora is shown playing on Charlie Brown's baseball team in some strips, taking the outfield spot next to Lucy that had once been held by Frieda, before the latter disappeared from the strip. She was also one of the girls who was nicer to Charlie Brown often hanging out with him and playing board games. Eudora would eventually disappear as well, with her swan song coming on June 13, 1987, exactly nine years to the day after her introduction.
Eudora was the last new character to join the Peanuts world who could arguably be classified as a major character. Any new characters introduced after her only made limited appearances as part of specific storylines.


== Television appearancesEdit ==
Of all the major characters in Peanuts, Eudora appeared on television the fewest number of times. She only appeared in A Charlie Brown Celebration (1982), The Charlie Brown and Snoopy Show episodes "Snoopy's Cat Fight" and "Sally's Sweet Babboo", and had a quick cameo in A Charlie Brown Valentine, where she is seen walking with Sally.


=== Voiced byEdit ===
Casey Carlson (1982)
Mary Tunnel (1983)
Gini Holtzman (1984-1986)
Lauren Schaffel (2002)