The Triple fff Brewing Company Ltd is a small independent brewer of real ale based in Four Marks, Alton, Hampshire, England, founded in November 1997, and producing award-winning bitters, milds and stouts. They own two pubs, the Railway Arms in Alton and The White Lion in Aldershot.
Triple fff was launched in 1997 by Graham Trott,and his partner Frank. They installed a 5 barrel plant in one of the units vacated by the now closed furniture factory on Station Approach in the village of Four Marks.
Graham and Frank took a musical theme for their brewery name as triple fff is the strong note; louder, louder, louder. Some people found the name amusing, and referred to their beer as: Frank's Flushing Fluid. Franks' share of the business was bought out after a few years by Graham.
The beer names came from song titles of the 60s rock icons, Van Morrison, Led Zeppelin and Cream with Moondance (4.2%ABV), Stairway (4.6%ABV) and the Pressed Rat and Warthog (3.8%ABV).
The year 2000 saw an expansion into an 18 Barrel plant and in 2006 the brewery became a 50 Barrel system brewing over 31,000 pints a week.
The brewery produces real ale and has won over 35 awards, including overall Champion Beer of Britain at the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) Great British Beer Festival. They use ingredients, including Maris Otter Barley malted in the traditional way at Warminster Maltings. Their beers include:
Moondance - one of their original beers and champion Best Bitter of Britain 2002 when it also won the bronze award in the overall competition. In 2006 it won silver in the Best Bitter category.
Comfortably Numb - their other original brew, and a mid brown strong ale
Alton's Pride - a golden brown session bitter which gained the bronze award in the Bitter category at Olympia in 2003 and 2004 and the overall Champion Beer of Britain award in 2008.
Pressed Rat and Warthog - champion Mild of Britain 2002
Stairway - a pale brown ale with a flavour of summer fruits
Little Red Rooster - a rich, dark beer from a complex combination of pale and dark malts
A recent venture has been to produce a beer from a recipe by Gilbert White, the famous naturalist born in 1720 in nearby Selborne. The recipe uses hops and smoked barley.


== References ==

CAMRA Ltd. "Champion Beers of the Festival 2004". Peterborough CAMRA Beer Festival. Retrieved 2006-07-15.