Bruno Vain is a Hispanic radio and television sportscaster. Despite his young age, he is perhaps one of the most highly recognized soccer play by play announcers in United States today. He has been an announcer for countless international encounters as well as FIFA World Cups and Olympic Games and has logged over 300 interviews with sport’s luminaries from soccer legends to NBA stars. Among these are Diego Maradona, Michael Jordan, Manu Ginóbili, Shaquille O’Neal, and Magic Johnson, among others.
Bruno is currently one of the main anchors at DirecTV Sports where he led the network's coverage of Summer 2012 Olympics from London. Such coverage included an unprecedented six 24-hour-a-day channels. Bruno was also among DirecTV Sports main anchors & studio hosts for the network's coverage of 2014 FIFA World Cup from Brazil and basketball's 2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup from Spain. Since joining DirecTV Sports in 2007, Bruno also hosted the network's coverage of FIFA World Cup 2010 from South Africa, FIBA World Cup 2010 from Turkey, Under 20 FIFA World Cup 2011 from Colombia, numerous NBA Finals, and 2011 FIBA Americas Championship from Argentina, among many others.
Bruno also currently serves as soccer play by play at beIn Sport, where he covered 2015 Copa América, and where he calls games from international leagues such as La Liga or Serie A and participates in the network's shows, such as "The Locker Room", both in English and Spanish.


== Bio ==
His career initiated in 1994 in his native country of Argentina in Rock & Pop Radio and Torneos y Competencias, a production company through which Bruno hosted shows and broadcast games in Argentina’s major air and cable stations, such as Channel 13 and TyC Sports. Bruno’s fluent bilingual abilities allowed him to venture into English play by play for the Soccer Argentinian League in 1997 and 1998. In 2000 he was recruited by Panamerican Sports Network where he continued to grow his talent as host of the controversy show “PSN Deportivo” and “NBA JAM” and as main announcer for PSN’s NBA games. Since then, he has continued to develop his career in the US working for some of the top and most highly rated Hispanic Networks (Telemundo, Univision, TV Azteca, Fox Sports Latin America, ESPN, and GolTV.
) From GolTV’s first broadcast in 2002 until August 2006, Vain became a key player at the network, where he shared his knowledge of soccer with fans as an anchor for several of the network’s top programs such as “Volkswagen Gol” and 45/45, and he handled as well play by play duties for GolTV's top leagues such as Spain's Liga de Futbol Profesional, Italy's Serie A and other international games.
In 2006, Vain was part of Univision’s broadcasting team for the 2006 World Cup, where he performed play by play duties from Germany for live games and also acted as a studio host for an estimated audience of 50 million people in the US. Criticism of his performance has been mostly positive among analysts and throughout different soccer circles. Additionally, Vain’s versatility allowed him to venture into the general news field, where he serves as US correspondent for Telenoche, Argentina’s most prestigious and highest rated general newscast, which airs daily on Channel 13.
In February 2007 Bruno joined DirecTV Latin America, where he anchors soccer shows and performs play by play duties for English Premier League and Spanish League. Vain also served as host and play by play announcer for Fox Deportes, which airs in the US, between 2007 and 2012. On top of his TV responsibilities, Vain also worked in 2007 and 2008 at ESPN Deportes Radio, where he participated in the station’s shows and also served as soccer & NBA play by play announcer.