The Battle of Carabobo, 24 June 1821, was fought between independence fighters, led by Venezuelan General Simón Bolívar, and the Royalist forces, led by Spanish Field Marshal Miguel de la Torre. Bolívar's decisive victory at Carabobo led to the independence of Venezuela.


== Order of battle ==


=== Army of Gran Colombia ===
Commander in Chief: Gen. Simon Bolivar
1st Army Division (Commander: Gen. Jose Antonio Paez)
1st Infantry Brigade
Apure Braves
British Legions

1st Cavalry
Honor Cavalry Regiment
Honored Lancers, The Death
Valiant Horse Rifles, The Vengeance
Mounted Rifle Regiment
Hussar Regiment

2nd Army Division (Commander: Gen. Manuel Cedeno)
2nd Infantry Brigade
Vargas Battalion
Boyaca
Guaicaiapuro Foot
Tiralleurs Battalion

Sacred Cavalry Squadron

3rd Army Division (Commander: Gen. Ambrosio Plaza)
3rd Infantry Brigade

Battalion of the Victorious of Boyaca
Foot Grenadiers
Rifles Regiment
Anzoátegui Foot Battalion
Foot Guards Battalion

Horse Guards Regiment
Dragoons
Hussars
Horse Guards
Lancers


=== Royalist Army ===

Commander in Chief of the Royal Armies: Field Marshal Juan Miguel de la Torre
Division Commanders: Gen. Morales (1st), Cols. Jose María Herrera (4th Vanguard) and Tomás Garcia (5th).
Infantry Battalions attached under the three divisions:

Garcia Division: 1st Infantry Brigade
4th Division: Vanguard Brigade
Morales Division: 3rd Infantry Brigade

2nd Valencay Infantry
Barbastro Foot
Burgos Foot
Hostalrich Foot
Infante Don Francisco
Principe

Cavalry Brigade
General's Bodyguards
Loyal Dragoons
HM King Ferdinand VII's Own Hussars
King's Own Lancers
Union Carabiniers

2 artillery pieces, each attached to the Garcia and the 4th Divisions


== Before the Battle ==
There were several events that led to the Battle of Carabobo. Francisco Miranda, famed patriot that tried to free many Latin American countries alongside Simon Bolivar, had taken control of Caracas from 1810 to 1812. The Spanish took back control and Miranda was handed to the royalists because Bolivar, in one of his most questionable decisions of his life, believed him to be traitor. Bolivar then fled from Venezuela, after which he organized the Admirable Campaign in 1813 and re-established the Second Republic of Venezuela. Bolivar would lose Venezuela again in 1814 and he would re-establish the Venezuelan Republic one more time before uniting with the New Granada to form the Gran Colombia union. In 1820, an armistice was made between the Spanish, under General Pablo Morillo, and the Patriots, under Bolivar. During the years after he fled from Venezuela, Bolivar spent a lot of time regrouping his forces. He stationed his men on Lake Maracaibo, an area that was occupied by the loyalists. Bolivar had numerical superiority over the loyalists but it would still be a challenge.


== The Battle ==

The Royalists occupied the road leading from Valencia to Puerto Cabello. As Bolívar's force of 6,500 (which included over 600 volunteers from the British Isles) approached the Royalist position, Bolívar divided his force and sent half on a flanking maneuver through rough terrain and dense foliage. Bolivar led the attack through the center while Gen. José Antonio Páez went around to the right flank. But before they would do it, the 2 Spanish field guns fired on the lines.
Gen. Miguel de la Torre, commander of the Spanish, also split his force and sent half to deal with this flank attack. Hitting the Patriots, led by the Apure Braves Battalion, with musket fire, the Royalists held back the attack for a while. The Venezuelan infantry failed and retreated, but the men of the "British Legions", among them many members of the former King's German Legion, fought hard and took the hills. They played very pivotal roles in several of the independence battles and were very crucial in this battle. The legion troops were led by Colonel Thomas Ilderton Ferrier. They defended strategically important hills while being greatly outnumbered and low on supplies. They suffered 119 deaths. 11 of those were officers. Col. Ferrier was among the dead. Bolivar praised the Legion troops and called them the "Saviors of my Fatherland" and also said that they had distinguished themselves among other armies.
As the Legion gained the top, the Apure Braves and 2 companies of the Tiralleurs Battalion (2nd Division) reinforced them, and pushed the enemy off, just as Pedro Camejo, lance in hand, was trying to rally the formations, only to be KIA due to two shots to the chest from enemy gunfire, in front of General Paez, who told him that he was a coward, to which, with his dying breath, responded: No I am not! My general, I have come to tell you goodbye, because now I am dead!
The cavalry militia of royalist "Llanero" fled from battlefield as the Patriot infantry fought hard, and the patriot cavalry led by Colonel Munoz eventually broke through the Royalist lines on the center, and marched towards the rear of de La Torre's force. The Spanish infantry formed squares and fought to the end under the attack of the Patriot cavalry, but one battalion retreated in the face of the enemy. The rout was so bad that only some 400 of one infantry regiment managed to reach safety at Puerto Cabello. With the main Royalist force in Venezuela crushed, independence was ensured. Subsequent battles included a key naval victory for the independence forces on 24 July 1823 at the Battle of Lake Maracaibo  and in November 1823 José Antonio Páez occupied Puerto Cabello, the last Royalist stronghold in Venezuela.
The victory was a hard won one for the independence forces. Both Ambrosio Plaza and Manuel Cedeno, commanders of the 2nd and 3rd Divisions, were killed in the battle by the enemy.


== Commemoration ==

24 June is celebrated as Battle of Carabobo Day. This day is also called "Army Day" in Venezuela.

Every year during the month of June; the 24th specifically, honors the penultimate battle of the Venezuelan War of Independence and the largest battle of that war that finally secured national independence after years of war against Spain. It is a national celebration that is televised and streamed on the Internet. It lasts all day with a military parade of the Venezuelan Army, showing to public all armaments, tanks, battalions, weapons, etc. of the ground forces, as the main highlight, during the midday hours.
This military parade doesn’t have any sponsorship except by the government and the Army.
It’s the largest military parade in the country after the celebration of the birth of General Simon Bolivar on 24 July 1783 (Navy Day) and the annual Independence Day parades of 5 July yearly.
Also held is a joint historical reenactment organized by the Carabobo State Government, the Ministry of Defense, the National Armed Forces, and the Ministry of Education on the very site of the battle in the morning, joined in by elementary and middle school students. The 2015 event was held for the first time on the Sunday nearest the anniversary, June 21.


== See also ==
Ambrosio Plaza
Nevado, Bolivar's dog, who died in the Battle of Carabobo


== Notes ==


== External links ==


=== Animated Demo ===
http://www.prodi.com.ve/home/presentacion1.htm (in Spanish language)


=== General ===
Venezuela on Encyclopedia of Days
Carabobo 1821 on Prodiseño Escuela de Comunicación Visual y Diseño
Bolivar's British Legion by Ian Fletcher from Ian Fletcher Battlefield Tours
Pages of Glory on Simón Bolívar, The Southamerican Washington from Don Mabry's Historical Text Archive.