The American Medical Marijuana Association (AMMA) is an organization formed to promote and protect the legal access to medical marijuana.
The American Medical Marijuana Association (AMMA), was founded in cyberspace on October 27, 2000, by Steve Kubby, Ed Rosenthal and Tod H. Mikuriya. AMMA has been at the forefront of the battle to protect the rights of medical cannabis patients and recently received official recognition by the United States government as one of the top organization websites promoting medical marijuana law reform. This recommendation appears in a briefing by the White House and is available online at the official web site for the White House Drug Policy.
AMMA is a group of volunteers working together to implement, preserve and protect the rights of medicinal cannabis patients through political activism. Their platform is based on the idea of not bargaining away people's rights. AMMA believes that each person will have different needs, which are best determined by the patient and physician. What works well for one patient may not work for another.
AMMA's activism includes aiding in the defense of cannabis patients should they be so unfortunate as to be prosecuted for their choice of medication. One way AMMA is able to do this is through the sharing of successful motions, writs, declarations and demands.
Because California seems to be the testing grounds for medical cannabis patients it is not surprising to see most of the information originating from that state. AMMA's goal is to preserve California Proposition 215, the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. AMMA is concerned that some members of law enforcement are trying to re-write the law, infringing upon the rights of the voters, placing conditions that violate the California State Constitution.


== AMMA National Director ==
Steve Kubby. Former Libertarian Party nominee for governor of California and author of two books on drug policy, Mr. Kubby has addressed world leaders at the World Forum, and is the former publisher of an international ski magazine.


== AMMA Advisors ==
Richard Cowan. Former National Director of NORML. Member of the Advisory Board of the Drug Policy Foundation. Senior Policy Advisor to NORML. Editor and Publisher, marijuananews.
Ed Rosenthal. Recognized worldwide as an authority on marijuana. In his thirty-plus years as a cannabis expert, he has written or edited more than a dozen books about marijuana cultivation and social policy.
Rev. Lynnette Shaw. Founder and director of the Cannabis Buyers' Club Marin in Fairfax, California, licensed since 1997.


== References ==


== External links ==
VIDEO: Cannabis and Cannabinoids in the 21st Century: Medical Marijuana Dr. David Bearman speaks at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, November 2007.
Official website