Metamorphism is the change of minerals or geologic texture (distinct arrangement of minerals) in pre-existing rocks (protoliths), without the protolith melting into liquid magma (a solid-state change). The change occurs primarily due to heat, pressure, and the introduction of chemically active fluids. The chemical components and crystal structures of the minerals making up the rock may change even though the rock remains a solid. Changes at or just beneath Earth's surface due to weathering and/or diagenesis are not classified as metamorphism. Metamorphism typically occurs between diagenesis 200°C, and melting 850°C.
Three types of metamorphism exist: contact, dynamic, and regional. Metamorphism produced with increasing pressure and temperature conditions is known as prograde metamorphism. Conversely, decreasing temperatures and pressure characterize retrograde metamorphism.


== Solid state recrystalization and neocrystalization ==
Metamorphic rocks can change without melting. Heat causes atomic bonds to break, and the atoms move and form new bonds with other atoms, creating new minerals with different chemical components or crystalline structures (neocrystallization), or enabling recrystallization. When pressure is applied, somewhat flattened grains that orient in the same direction have a more stable configuration.


== Limits of metamorphism ==
The temperature lower limit of metamorphism is considered to be 100 – 200 °C, to exclude diagenetic changes, due to compaction, which result in sedimentary rocks. There is no agreement on a pressure lower limit. Some workers argue that changes in atmospheric pressures are not metamorphic, but some types of metamorphism can occur at extremely low pressures (see below).
The upper boundary of metamorphic conditions is related to the onset of melting processes in the rock. The maximum temperature for metamorphism is typically 700 – 900 °C, depending on the pressure and on the composition of the rock. Migmatites are rocks formed at this upper limit, which contain pods and veins of material that has started to melt but has not fully segregated from the refractory residue. Since the 1980s it has been recognized that, rarely, rocks are dry enough and of a refractory enough composition to record without melting "ultra-high" metamorphic temperatures of 900 – 1100 °C.


== Kinds of metamorphism ==


=== Regional metamorphism ===
Regional or Barrovian metamorphism covers large areas of continental crust typically associated with mountain ranges, particularly those associated with convergent tectonic plates or the roots of previously eroded mountains. Conditions producing widespread regionally metamorphosed rocks occur during an orogenic event. The collision of two continental plates or island arcs with continental plates produce the extreme compressional forces required for the metamorphic changes typical of regional metamorphism. These orogenic mountains are later eroded, exposing the intensely deformed rocks typical of their cores. The conditions within the subducting slab as it plunges toward the mantle in a subduction zone also produce regional metamorphic effects, characterized by paired metamorphic belts. The techniques of structural geology are used to unravel the collisional history and determine the forces involved. Regional metamorphism can be described and classified into metamorphic facies or metamorphic zones of temperature/pressure conditions throughout the orogenic terrane.


=== Contact (thermal) metamorphism ===

Contact metamorphism occurs typically around intrusive igneous rocks as a result of the temperature increase caused by the intrusion of magma into cooler country rock. The area surrounding the intrusion where the contact metamorphism effects are present is called the metamorphic aureole. Contact metamorphic rocks are usually known as hornfels. Rocks formed by contact metamorphism may not present signs of strong deformation and are often fine-grained.
Contact metamorphism is greater adjacent to the intrusion and dissipates with distance from the contact. The size of the aureole depends on the heat of the intrusion, its size, and the temperature difference with the wall rocks. Dikes generally have small aureoles with minimal metamorphism whereas large ultramafic intrusions can have significantly thick and well-developed contact metamorphism.
The metamorphic grade of an aureole is measured by the peak metamorphic mineral which forms in the aureole. This is usually related to the metamorphic temperatures of pelitic or alumonisilicate rocks and the minerals they form.The metamorphic grades of aureoles are andalusite hornfels, sillimanite hornfels, pyroxene hornfels.
Magmatic fluids coming from the intrusive rock may also take part in the metamorphic reactions. Extensive addition of magmatic fluids can significantly modify the chemistry of the affected rocks. In this case the metamorphism grades into metasomatism. If the intruded rock is rich in carbonate the result is a skarn. Fluorine-rich magmatic waters which leave a cooling granite may often form greisens within and adjacent to the contact of the granite. Metasomatic altered aureoles can localize the deposition of metallic ore minerals and thus are of economic interest.


=== Hydrothermal metamorphism ===
Hydrothermal metamorphism is the result of the interaction of a rock with a high-temperature fluid of variable composition. The difference in composition between existing rock and the invading fluid triggers a set of metamorphic and metasomatic reactions. The hydrothermal fluid may be magmatic (originate in an intruding magma), circulating groundwater, or ocean water. Convective circulation of hydrothermal fluids in the ocean floor basalts produces extensive hydrothermal metamorphism adjacent to spreading centers and other submarine volcanic areas. The fluids eventually escape through vents in the ocean floor known as black smokers. The patterns of this hydrothermal alteration is used as a guide in the search for deposits of valuable metal ores.


=== Shock metamorphism ===

This kind of metamorphism occurs when either an extraterrestrial object (a meteorite for instance) collides with the Earth's surface or during an extremely violent volcanic eruption. Impact metamorphism is, therefore, characterized by ultrahigh pressure conditions and low temperature. The resulting minerals (such as SiO2 polymorphs coesite and stishovite) and textures are characteristic of these conditions.


=== Dynamic metamorphism ===
Dynamic metamorphism is associated with zones of high to moderate strain such as fault zones. Cataclasis, crushing and grinding of rocks into angular fragments, occurs in dynamic metamorphic zones, giving cataclastic texture.
The textures of dynamic metamorphic zones are dependent on the depth at which they were formed, as the temperature and confining pressure determine the deformation mechanisms which predominate. Within depths less than 5 km, dynamic metamorphism is not often produced because the confining pressure is too low to produce frictional heat. Instead, a zone of breccia or cataclasite is formed, with the rock milled and broken into random fragments. This generally forms a mélange. At depth, the angular breccias transit into a ductile shear texture and into mylonite zones.
Within the depth range of 5–10 km pseudotachylite is formed, as the confining pressure is enough to prevent brecciation and milling and thus energy is focused into discrete fault planes. Frictional heating in this case may melt the rock to form pseudotachylite glass.
Within the depth range of 10–20 km, deformation is governed by ductile deformation conditions and hence frictional heating is dispersed throughout shear zones, resulting in a weaker thermal imprint and distributed deformation. Here, deformation forms mylonite, with dynamothermal metamorphism observed rarely as the growth of porphyroblasts in mylonite zones.
Overthrusting may juxtapose hot lower crustal rocks against cooler mid and upper crust blocks, resulting in conductive heat transfer and localised contact metamorphism of the cooler blocks adjacent to the hotter blocks, and often retrograde metamorphism in the hotter blocks. The metamorphic assemblages in this case are diagnostic of the depth and temperature and the throw of the fault and can also be dated to give an age of the thrusting.


== Classification of metamorphic rocks ==
Metamorphic rocks are classified by their mineral composition, the source rock, also known as a protolith, and the context (pressure, temperature, hydrological features, etc.) of its formation.


=== Metamorphic facies ===
Metamorphic facies are recognizable terranes or zones with an assemblage of key minerals that were in equilibrium under specific range of temperature and pressure during a metamorphic event. The facies are named after the metamorphic rock formed under those facies conditions from basalt. Facies relationships were first described by Pentti Eskola in 1921.

Facies:
Low T – Low P : Zeolite
Mod – High T – Low P : Prehnite-Pumpellyite
Low T – High P : Blueschist
Mod to High T – Mod P : Greenschist – Amphibolite – Granulite
Mod – High T – High P : Eclogite
See diagram for more detail.


=== Metamorphic grades ===
Metamorphic grade is an informal indication of the amount or degree of metamorphism. A more complete indication of this intensity or degree is provided with the concept of metamorphic facies.
In the Barrovian sequence (described by George Barrow in zones of progressive metamorphism in Scotland), metamorphic grades are also classified by mineral assemblage based on the appearance of key minerals in rocks of pelitic (shaly, aluminous) origin:
Low grade ------------------- Intermediate --------------------- High grade
Greenschist ------------- Amphibolite ----------------------- Granulite
Slate --- Phyllite ---------- Schist ---------------------- Gneiss --- Migmatite
Chlorite zone

Biotite zone

Garnet zone

Staurolite zone

Kyanite zone

Sillimanite zone


== Metamorphic processes ==


=== Recrystallization ===
During recrystallization, the grains making up the protolith change shape and size. The identity of the mineral does not change during this process, only the texture. Recrystallization occurs due to heating of the protolith. The temperature at which this occurs can vary depending on the minerals present. Recrystallization generally begins when temperatures reach above half the melting point of the mineral on the Kelvin scale.


=== Phase change ===
Phase change metamorphism is the creating of new minerals with the same chemical formula as the protolith. This involves a rearrangement of the atoms in the crystals.


=== Neocrystallization ===
Neocrystallization involves the creation of new mineral crystals different from the protolith. Chemical reactions digest the minerals of the protolith which yields new minerals. This is a very slow process as it can also involve the diffusion of atoms through solid crystals.


=== Pressure solution ===

Pressure solution is a metamorphic process that requires a rock to be under strong pressure from one direction and in the presence of hot water. During this process mineral of the protolith partially dissolve, diffuse through the water and precipitate elsewhere.


=== Plastic deformation ===
In plastic deformation pressure is applied to the protolith, which causes it to shear or bend, but not break. In order for this to happen temperatures must be high enough that brittle fractures do not occur, but not so high that diffusion of crystals takes place.


== Prograde and retrograde metamorphism ==
Metamorphism is further divided into prograde and retrograde metamorphism. Prograde metamorphism involves the change of mineral assemblages (paragenesis) with increasing temperature and (usually) pressure conditions. These are solid state dehydration reactions, and involve the loss of volatiles such as water or carbon dioxide. Prograde metamorphism results in rock characteristic of the maximum pressure and temperature experienced. Metamorphic rocks usually do not undergo further change when they are brought back to the surface.
Retrograde metamorphism involves the reconstitution of a rock via revolatisation under decreasing temperatures (and usually pressures), allowing the mineral assemblages formed in prograde metamorphism to revert to those more stable at less extreme conditions. This is a relatively uncommon process, because volatiles must be present.


== See also ==
Geothermobarometry
Metamorphic rock
Metasomatism
Subduction zone metamorphism
Ultrahigh-temperature metamorphism


== Footnotes ==


== References ==
Bucher, Kurt, 2002, Petrogenesis of Metamorphic Rock, Springer
Eskola P., 1920, The Mineral Facies of Rocks, Norsk. Geol. Tidsskr., 6, 143-194
Gillen, Cornelius, 1982, Metamorphic Geology : an Introduction to Tectonic and Metamorphic Processes, London; Boston: G. Allen & Unwin ISBN 978-0045510580
Marshak, Stephen, 2009, Essentials of Geology, W. W. Norton & Company, 3rd ed. ISBN 978-0393196566
Vernon, R. H., 1976, Metamorphic Processes, Halsted Press
Vernon, Ronald Holden, 2008, Principles of Metamorphic Petrology, Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-0521871785


== Further reading ==
Winter J.D., 2001, An Introduction to Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology, Prentice-Hall ISBN 0-13-240342-0.


== External links ==
Recommendations by the IUGS Subcommission on the Systematics of Metamorphic Rocks, 1. HOW TO NAME A METAMORPHIC ROCK
Recommendations by the IUGS Subcommission on the Systematics of Metamorphic Rocks, 2. TYPES, GRADE AND FACIES OF METAMORPHISM
Recommendations by the IUGS Subcommission on the Systematics of Metamorphic Rocks, 3. Structural terms including fault rock terms
Recommendations by the IUGS Subcommission on the Systematics of Metamorphic Rocks, 4. HIGH P/T METAMORPHIC ROCKS
James Madison University: Metamorphism
BARROVIAN METAMORPHISM: Brock Univ.
Metamorphism of Carbonate Rocks: University of Wisconsin – Green Bay
Metamorphic Petrology Database (MetPetDB) – Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute