A title is a prefix or suffix added to someone's name in certain contexts. It may signify either veneration, an official position or a professional or academic qualification. In some languages, titles may be inserted before a last name (for example, Graf in German, Cardinal in Catholic usage or clerical titles such as Archbishop). Some titles are hereditary.


== Types ==
Titles include:
Honorific titles or styles of address, a phrase used to convey respect to the recipient of a communication, or to recognize an attribute such as:
Nobility
Academic degree
Other accomplishment, as with a title of honor

Title of authority, an identifier that specifies the office or position held by an official


== Titles in English-speaking areas ==
The following titles are the default titles:
Mr - Adult male
Mrs - Adult females (usually just for married females, widows, and divorcées)
Ms - Adult females (used by those who are not strongly identified with their marital status or don't wish their marital status to be known; the female equivalent of Mr)
Miss - Formal title for unmarried females and for female children
Mx - Gender-neutral title (used by non-binary people as well as those who do not wish to reveal their gender)
Master - For male children: Young boys were formerly addressed as "Master [first name]." This was the standard form for servants to use in addressing their employer's minor sons. It is also the courtesy title for the eldest son of a Scottish laird.
Maid - Archaic: When used as a title before a name, this was a way to denote an unmarried woman, such as the character Maid Marian.
Madam (also madame)
Aunt, Auntie, or Uncle may be used as titles by nieces and nephews, or by children to adults who they know.
Other titles are used for various reasons, such as to show aristocratic status or one's role in government, in a religious organization, or in a branch of the military.


=== Legislative and executive titles ===
Hon. (Honourable) (for younger sons and daughters of barons) and. Rt. Hon. (Right Honourable) (for Privy Councillors), used in the United Kingdom
Some job titles of members of the legislature and executive are used as titles.
MP, for members of the Parliament
MYP, for members of the Youth Parliament
Representative
Senator
Speaker
President (from which comes such titles as Deputy President, Executive Vice President, Lord President of the Council, and Vice President)
Councillor
Alderman/Selectman
Delegate
Mayor and related terms such as Lady Mayoress and Lord Mayor
Governor and Lieutenant Governor
Prefect
Prelate
Premier
Burgess
Ambassador
Envoy
Secretary, Cardinal Secretary of State, Foreign Secretary, General Secretary, Secretary of State, and other titles in the form "Secretary of..." in which Secretary means the same thing as Minister
Attaché
Chargé d'affaires
Provost


=== Aristocratic titles ===

Prince/Princess – From the Latin princeps, meaning "first person" or "first citizen." The title was originally used by Augustus at the establishment of the Roman Empire to avoid the political risk of assuming the title Rex ("King") in what was technically still a republic. In modern times, the title is often given to the sons and daughters of ruling monarchs. Also a title of certain ruling monarchs under the Holy Roman Empire and its subsidiary territories until 1918 (still survives in Liechtenstein, and also in Monaco although that is elsewhere), and in Imperial Russia before 1917. The German title is Fürst ("first") is a translation of the Latin term; the equivalent Russian term is князь (knyaz).
Archduke/Archduchess – A title derived from the Greek Archon ("ruler; higher") and the Latin Dux("leader"). It was used most notably by the Habsburg Dynasty that ruled Austria and Hungary until 1918
Grand Duke/Grand Duchess. "Big; large" + Latin Dux (leader). A variant of "Archduke," used particularly in English translations Romanov Dynasty Russian titles. Also used in various Germanic territories until World War I. Still survives in Luxembourg.
Duke (the feminine equivalent is Duchess) from the Latin Dux, a military title used in the Roman Empire, especially in its early Byzantine period when it designated the military commander for a specific zone.
Marquis or Marquess (the feminine equivalent is Marquise or Marchioness) from the French marchis, literally "ruler of a border area," (from Old French marche meaning "border"); exact English translation is "March Lord," or "Lord of the March."
Count (the feminine equivalent is Countess) from the Latin comes meaning "companion." The word was used by the Roman Empire in its Byzantine period as an honorific with a meaning roughly equivalent to modern English "peer." It became the title of those who commanded field armies in the Empire, as opposed to "Dux" which commanded locally based forces.
Earl (used in the United Kingdom instead of Count, but the feminine equivalent is Countess) From the Germanic jarl, meaning "chieftain," the title was brought to the British Isles by the Anglo-Saxons and survives in use only there, having been superseded in Scandinavia and on the European continent.
Viscount (feminine equivalent is Viscountess) From the Latin vicarius (Deputy; substitute. Hence "vicar" and prefix "vice-") appended to Latin comes. Literally: "Deputy Count"
Baron (the feminine equivalent is Baroness) From the Late Latin Baro, meaning "man, servant, soldier" the title originally designated the chief feudal tenant of a place, who was in vassalage to a greater lord.
In the United Kingdom, "Lord" and "Lady" are used as titles for members of the nobility. Unlike titles such as "Mr" and "Mrs", they are not used before first names except in certain circumstances, for example as courtesy titles for younger sons, etc., of peers.
Lord from Old English hlāford, hlāfweard, meaning, literally, “bread-keeper," from hlāf (“bread”) + weard (“guardian, keeper”) and by extension husband, father, or chief. (From which comes modified titles such as First Sea Lord and Lord of the Manor.) The feminine equivalent is Lady from the related Old English hlǣfdīġe meaning, literally, “bread-kneader”, from hlāf (“bread”) + dīġe (“maid”), and by extension wife, daughter, or mistress of the house. (From which comes First Lady, the anachronistic Second Lady, etc.)
Emperor/Empress - From the Latin Imperator, meaning he/she who holds the authority to command (imperium)
King/Queen - Derived from Old Norse/Germanic words. The original meaning of the root of "king" apparently meant "leader of the family" or "descendant of the leader of the family," and the original meaning of "queen," "wife." By the time the words came into English they already meant "ruler."
Tsar/Tsarina (Tsaritsa) - Slavonic loan-word from Latin Caesar: the name of Julius Caesar taken by his heir Augustus and thereafter by Augustus' successors as Roman Emperor through the fall of Constantinople in 1453. Germanic loan-word for Caesar is Kaiser.
Leader – From Old English lædan, meaning "to guide", derived from Old Norse and Germanic. The head of state of North Korea is titled Great Leader. The de facto head of state of Iran is titled Supreme Leader.
Popess
The title of a character found in Tarot cards based upon the Pope on the Roman Catholic Church. As the Bishop of Rome is an office always forbidden to women there is no formal feminine of Pope, which comes from the Latin word papa (an affectionate form of the Latin for father). Indeed, the Oxford English Dictionary does not contain the word.
The mythical Pope Joan, who was reportedly a woman, is always referred to with the masculine title pope, even when her female identity is known. Further, even if a woman were to become Bishop of Rome it is unclear if she would take the title popess; a parallel might be drawn with the Anglican Communion whose female clergy use the masculine titles of priest and bishop as opposed to priestess or bishopess.
Nonetheless some European languages, along with English, have formed a feminine form of the word pope, such as the Italian papessa, the French papesse, and the German Päpstin.


=== Titles used by knights, dames, baronets and baronetesses ===
These do not belong to the nobility.
Sir - Used by knights and baronets
Dame - Used by dames and baronetesses
"Sir" and "Dame" differ from titles such as "Mr" and "Mrs" in that they can only be used before a person's first name, and not immediately before their surname.
Chevalier


=== Judicial titles ===
Advocate
Advocate General AG
Attorney
Bailiff
Barrister
Chancellor C (of the High Court)
Judge and Admiralty Judge
Justice J
Lord Chief Justice CJ (of the judiciary)
Lord Justice Clerk
Lord Justice of Appeal LJ (of the Court of Appeal)
Justice of the Peace

Magistrate and Promagistrate
Master of the Rolls MR (of the Court of Appeal)
Member and Chairman, for members of quasi-judicial boards
Mufti and Grand Mufti
President P (of the Queen's/King's Bench Division) or President P (of the Family Division)
Lord President of the Court of Session

Privy Counsellor (or Privy Councillor) PC (of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council)
Queen's Counsel QC (King's Counsel KC when monarch is male)
Solicitor


==== Historical ====
Lictor
Reeve
Seneschal
Tribune


=== Ecclesiastical titles (Christian) ===
Titles are used to show somebody's ordination as a priest or their membership in a religious order. Use of titles differs between denominations.


==== Religious ====
Abbess
Abbot
Brother
Sister
Mother Superior
Friar
Mother, Mother Superior, and Reverend Mother


==== Priests ====
Christian priests often have their names prefixed with a title similar to The Reverend.
Bishop (from which come Archbishop, Boy Bishop, Lord Archbishop, Metropolitan Bishop, and Prince Bishop)
Presbyter
Priest (from which comes High Priest. The feminine equivalent is Priestess.)
Father (Fr.)
Patriarch
Pope
Catholicos
Vicar
Chaplain
Canon
Pastor
Prelate
Primate
Dom - (from Latin: Dominus, "Lord") Used for Benedictine monks in solemn religious vows, but reserved for abbots among the Trappists. In Brazil, it is used for bishops.
Cardinal
Ter (title) - Used by Armenian priests.


==== Used for deceased persons only ====
Servant of God
Venerable
Blessed
Saint (abbreviated S. or St.)


==== Other ====
Christ - Greek translation of Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ (or Messiah), commonly used to refer to Jesus of Nazareth
Deacon and Archdeacon
Acolyte
Dean
Elder
Minister
Monsignor
President (in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints)
Reader
Almoner and Lord High Almoner (Christian)


=== Academic titles ===

Dr. - Short for doctor, a title used by those with doctoral degrees, such as DPhil, MD, PhD, EdD, PharmD and LLD. Those with JD degrees do not use this as a title.
Prof. - Professor


=== Military titles ===
Military ranks are used before names.
Colonel
General
Commodore (from which comes Air Commodore)
Corporal (from which come Lance Corporal and Staff Corporal)
Mate, more often titled as Chief Mate or First Mate
Sergeant (from which come Sergeant at Mace and Sergeant of Arms
Admiral (from which come Grand Admiral, Lord High Admiral, Rear Admiral, and Vice Admiral)
Brigadier
Captain (from which comes Group Captain)
Commander (from which come Commander-in-Chief, Lieutenant Commander, and Wing Commander)
General is usually used as a sort of shorthand for "general military commander". The term's far-reaching connotation has provoked its use in a very broad range of titles, including Adjutant General, Attorney General, Captain General, Colonel General, Director General, Generalissimo, General of the Army, Governor General, Lieutenant General, Lord Justice General, Major General, Resident General, Secretary General, Solicitor General, Surgeon General and Vicar General
Officer, a generic sort of title whose use has spread in recent years into a wide array of mostly corporate and military titles. These include Air Officer, Chief Academic Officer, Chief analytics officer, Chief Business Development Officer, Chief Credit Officer, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Information Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, Chief Knowledge Officer, Chief Marketing Officer, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Petty Officer, Chief Risk Officer, Chief Security Officer, Chief Strategy Officer, Chief Technical Officer, Chief Warrant Officer, Corporate officer, Customs officer, Field officer, First Officer, Flag Officer, Flying Officer, General Officer, Intelligence Officer, Junior Warrant Officer, Master Chief Petty Officer, Master Warrant Officer, Officer of State, Petty Officer, Pilot Officer, Police Officer, Political Officer, Revenue Officer, Senior Officer, Ship's Officer, Staff Officer, and Warrant Officer.
Lieutenant (from which come First Lieutenant, Flight Lieutenant and Lord Lieutenant)
Major
Private - and many equivalent ranks depending on regiment


=== Ranks of other organizations ===
The names of police officers may be preceded by a title such as "Officer" or by their rank.
Constable (from which come Lord High Constable and Senior Constable)
Agent


=== Unofficial use ===
Some titles are used to show one's role or position in a society or organization.
Principal
Nurse and Nanny
Coach may be used before a name
Wizard, such as the Grand Wizard and Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan
Brother or Sister
Chief Scout (The Scout Association), the head of The Scout Association,
Queen's Scout title conferred upon a scout upon achieving highest attainable award achievable in the Scouting movement
Queen's Guide title conferred upon a guide upon highest attainable award for members of the Girl Guiding movement
Scout, Eagle Scout
Some titles are used in English to refer to the position of people in foreign political systems
Citizen, First Citizen
Comrade


== Non-English speaking areas ==


=== Default titles in other languages ===


=== Academic ===
Docent
Doctorandus, abbreviated as drs.


=== Religious ===
Lama and the related Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama
Druid and Archdruid
Rabbi
Rebbe
Hakham
Buddha
Ayatollah
Imam
Bodhisattva
Mullah
Kohen
Nath
Mahdi
Rosh HaYeshiva
Saoshyant
Tirthankar
Vardapet


=== Honorary titles ===
Mahatma
Pandit
Swami
Ustad
Sheikh


=== Rulers ===

Emir/Emira – Arabic Prince/Princess
Chief – origin of Chief of Staff, Chieftain, Clan Chief, Hereditary Chief, and War Chief. The present head of Samoa is titled a Paramount Chief
Sultan/Sultana (title) – Arabic for "powerful ruler"
Maharajah/Maharani
Eze
Mwami
Nizam
Dato
Oba
Tor Tiv of Tiv
Obi
Elder
Chancellor (from which come Lord Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor)
Vizier and Grand Vizier
Kim Jong-il was referred to as "Dear Leader" and "Supreme Leader". The title now refers to his successive son Kim Jong-un. (친애하는 지도자, ch'inaehanŭn jidoja)


==== Historical titles for heads of state ====
The following are no longer officially in use, though some may be claimed by former regnal dynasties.


===== Appointed =====
Caesar (an honorific family name passed through Roman emperors by adoption)
Legate
Tetrarch
Satrap


===== Elected or popularly declared =====
Archon
Caudillo
Consul
Decemvir
Roman dictator
Doge
Duce
Führer
Imperator
Lord Protector
Triumvir


===== Hereditary =====
Patil
Pharaoh
Basileus
Caliph
Khagan
Khan
King-Emperor (The feminine equivalent is Queen-Empress)
Mirza
Malik
Mikado
Nawab
Negus
Regina (the masculine form is Rex)
Saopha
Sapa Inca
Shah
Tsar
When a difference exists below, male titles are placed to the left and female titles are placed to the right of the slash.
Africa
Almamy – Fulani people of west Africa
Asantehene – Ashanti, title of the King of the Ashanti People in Ghana
Eze – Igbo people of Nigeria
Kabaka – Baganda people of Buganda in Uganda
Negus – Ethiopia
Oba – Yoruba people of Nigeria
Omukama – Bunyoro, title of some kings in Uganda
Pharaoh – ancient Egypt
Mwami – Kings of Rwanda and Burundi

Asia
Arasan/Arasi – Tamil Nadu (India), Sri Lanka
Bayin – The title given to the king of pre colonial Burma
Phrabat Somdej Phrachaoyuhua – King of Thailand (Siam), the title literally means "The feet of the Greatest Lord who is on the heads (of his subjects)" (This royal title does not refer directly to the king himself but to his feet, according to traditions.)
Druk Gyalpo — hereditary title given to the king of Bhutan
Chakrawarti Raja – India Sri Lanka
Chogyal — "Divine Ruler" — ruled Sikkim until 1975
Datu – pre-colonial Philippines
Engku or Ungku – Malaysia, to denote particular family lineage akin to royalty
Huángdì – Imperial China (Emperor)
Hwangje – Self-styled Korean "emperor"; states that unified Korea
Hoang De – Self-styled Vietnamese "emperor"; unified Vietnam

Meurah – Aceh before Islam
Patil - meaning "head" or "chief" is an Indian title.The Patil is in effect the ruler of this territory as he was entitled to the revenues collected therefrom.
Maha raja/feminine form is Maharani – Emperor, Empress India, Sri Lanka
Racha – Thailand, same meaning as Raja
Raja – pre-colonial Philippines
Raja – Malaysia, Raja denotes royalty in Perak and certain Selangor royal family lineages, is roughly equivalent to Prince or Princess
Raja – Nepal King
Rani – Nepali Queen
Hari – Filipino title for king

Patabenda – Sub- king Sri lanka
Preah Karuna Preah Bat Sâmdech Preah Bâromneath – King of Cambodia Khmer, the title literally means "The feet of the Greatest Lord who is on the heads (of his subjects)" (This royal title doesn't refer directly to the king himself but to his feet, according to traditions.)
Qaghan – Central Asian Tribes
Saopha – Shan, king of Shan, today as a part of Myanmar
Susuhanan – the Indonesian princely state of Surakarta until its abolition
Shahinshah or Padshah or Badshah- Persian/Iranian "King of Kings" or Persian rulers in Hindustan(India)
Shah – Persian/Iranian and Afghanistan and Tajikistan King

Sheikh – Arabic traditional regional leader, principalities of (Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, UAE)
Sultan/Sultana – Arabic King (present Oman and former Ottoman Empire)
Aceh, Brunei, Java, Oman, Malaysia, Sultan is the title of seven (Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Pahang, Perak, Selangor, and Terengganu) of the nine rulers of the Malay states.

Syed – Islamic World, descendants of the Islamic prophet Muhammad
Tennō or Mikado – Japan
Sumeramikoto, Okimi – Japan, king
Shogun – Japanese military dictator, always a Samurai

Tengku – Malaysia, Indonesia, Tengku (also spelled Tunku in Johor, Negeri Sembilan, Kedah and Deli Sultanate of Indonesia is roughly equivalent to Prince or Princess
Veyndhan, ko/Arasi – Tamil Nadu(India)
Wang (King) – pre-Imperial China. In China, "king" is the usual translation for the term wang 王.
Wang – States of Korea that did not have control over the entire peninsula.
Vuong – States in Vietnam that did not control the entire realm.

Yang di-Pertuan Agong – Monarch of Malaysia, elected each five years among the reigning Sultan of each Malaysian state
Mirza, Persian/Iranian, Indian and Afghanistan and Tajikistan King
Beg (Begzada or Begzadi, son-daughter of Beg), Baig or Bey in Under Mirza & using King or Military title.

Europe
Arqa/Thagavor – King of Armenia
Germanic king
Großbürger/Großbürgerin (English: Grand Burgher) – historical German title acquired or inherited by persons and family descendants of the ruling class in autonomous German-speaking cities and towns of Central Europe, origin under the Holy Roman Empire, ceased after 1919 along with all titles of German nobility.
Basileus – Greek ruler
Despot, a Byzantine court title, also granted in the states under Byzantine influence, such as the Latin Empire, Bulgaria, Serbia, and the Empire of Trebizond.
Vezér – Ancient Hungarian
Fejedelem – Ancient/Medieval Hungarian
Tsar – the ruler of Imperial Russia
Vojvoda (Serbian)/Vajda (Hungarian) – Serbian/Hungarian/Romany Title
Domn (in Romanian) /Gospodar (in Old Slavonian) – Medieval Romania (Moldova, Wallachia)
Rí, Rí túaithe, Ruiri, Rí ruireach, and Ard Rí – King, local king, regional overking, (provincial) king of overkings, and High King in Gaelic Ireland, also Scotland
Kniaz'/Knyaginya/Knez/Knjeginja (generally translated as "prince") – Kievan Rus'/Serbia
Kaiser – Imperial Germany
Tsar/Tsaritsa – Bulgaria, pre-imperial Russia, Serbia
Kunigaikshtis (Kunigaikštis) – Lithuanian, duke as in Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
Župan sometimes Veliki Župan (Grand Župan) – Serbia, Croatia
Autocrator Greek term for the Byzantine Emperor

Oceania
Chieftain – Leader of a tribe or clan.
Tuʻi or tui – there were/are also kings in Oceania (i.e. Samoa, Tonga, Wallis and Futuna, Nauru)
houʻeiki, matai, aliʻi, tūlafale, tavana, ariki – usually translated as "chief" in various Polynesian countries.
"Mo'i" normally translated as King is a title used by Hawaiian monarchs since unification in 1810. The last person to hold that title was Queen Lili'uokalani.


=== Aristocratic ===


==== Historical ====
Russian:
Boyarin
Dyak
Knyaz (and Veliky Knyaz)
Namestnik
Okolnichy
Posadnik
Voyevoda
German:
Burggraf
Graf
Freigraf
Landgraf
Markgraf
Pfalzgraf
Reichsgraf
Spanish:
Don
Hidalgo
others
Augusta (The masculine equivalent is Augustus)
Comes
Concubine (The Chinese imperial system, for instance, had a vastly complex hierarchy of titled concubines and wives to the emperor)
Ras (which translates as Head)
Bitwoded (translates as Beloved)
Fitawrari (translates as Leader of the Vanguard)
Dejazmach (translates as Commander of the Gate)
Kenyazmach (translates as Commander of the Right)
Gerazmach (translates as Commander of the Left)
Gentleman (used as a title is such forms as Gentleman at Arms, Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Gentleman Usher. The feminine equivalent of a Gentleman is a Gentlewoman, or, in some circumstances, a Lady.)
Sahib


== Fictional titles ==
Pendragon
Alpha
Anarch
Darth
Dominar
Domm
(Grand) Moff
Tisroc
Aes Sedai
Asha'man
Ser
Valeyard
Khal (male)/ Khaleesi (female)


== Other ==
Commissioner (from which come First Church Estates Commissioner and High Commissioner)
Comptroller (from which Comptroller General and Comptroller of the Household)
Courtier
Curator
Doyen
Edohen
Ekegbian
Elerunwon
Forester or Master Forester
Gentiluomo
Headman
Intendant (and the related Superintendent)
Lamido
Marcher or Lady Marcher
Matriarch or Patriarch
Prior, Lord Prior
Pursuivant
Rangatira
Ranger
Registrar (in a variant spelling in the title Lord Clerk Register)
Seigneur (from which come Monsignor and the French common polite term Monsieur, equivalent to Mister)
Sharif
Shehu
Sheikh
Sheriff (from which comes High Sheriff)
Subaltern
Subedar
Sysselmann
Timi
Treasurer, Master Treasurer and Secretary Treasurer
Verderer
Warden, Hereditary Warden, Lord Warden
Woodman
Bearer, such as Hereditary Banner Bearer, Standard Bearer, or Swordbearer
Sayyid
Apprentice
Journeyman
Adept
Akhoond
Arhat
Bwana
Goodman and Goodwife
Grand Bard
Hajji
Mullah
Sri
Baba
Effendi
Giani or Gyani
Guru
Siddha
Pir, Murshid


=== Historical ===
Abuna
Aedile
Ali'i
Aqabe sa'at (translates as Guardian of the Church Hours)
Balambaras (translates as Fortress Commander)
Ban
Baig
Bey
Boyar
Castellan
Cellarer
Censor
Centurion
Circuitor
Commissar, often as People's Commissar
Conquistadore
Daimyo
Dey
Dux
Elector
Gauleiter
Guardian
Ichege
Infirmerer
Inquisitor and Grand Inquisitor
Jemadar
Kitchener
Mage
Magister Militum
Majordomo
Margrave
Naib
Officium
Pasha
Palatine (Ancient Rome, the Roman Catholic Church, Hungary, etc.)
Pontiff and Pontifex Maximus
Praetor
Prebendary
Quaestor
Sacrist
Samurai
Shogun
Stadtholder
Steward
Thakore
Voivode
Viceroy (the feminine equivalent is Vicereine)


== Post-nominal letters ==
Members of legislatures often have post-nominal letters expressing this:
Member of Congress MC
Member of Parliament MP
Member of the European Parliament MEP
Member of the Scottish Parliament MSP
Member of Provincial Parliament MPP
Member of the National Assembly MNA
Member of the House of Keys MHK
Speaker of the House of Keys SHK

Member of the Legislative Council MLC
Member of the Legislative Assembly MLA
Member of the House of Representatives
Member of the House of Assembly


=== University degrees ===
Associate
AA - Associate of Arts
AAS - Associate of Applied Science
AS - Associate of Science

Bachelor
BA – Bachelor of Arts
BArch – Bachelor of Architecture
BBA – Bachelor of Business Administration
BSBA – Bachelor of Science of Business Administration
BBiotech - Bachelor of Biotechnology
BDS / BChD - Bachelor of Dental Surgery
BDentTech - Bachelor of Dental Technology
BDes - Bachelor of Design
BD / BDiv - Bachelor of Divinity
BEd - Bachelor of Education
BEng – Bachelor of Engineering
BEnvd - Bachelor of Environmental Design
BFA - Bachelor of Fine Arts
LLB – Bachelor of Laws
MB, ChB / MB, BS / BM, BCh / MB, BChir - Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
BMus - Bachelor of Music
BN - Bachelor of Nursing
BPhil – Bachelor of Philosophy
STB - Bachelor of Sacred Theology
BSc – Bachelor of Science
BSN - Bachelor of Science in Nursing
BSW-Bachelor of Social Work
BTh / ThB - Bachelor of Theology
BVSc – Bachelor of Veterinary Science

Designer [Dz]
Doctor
DA – Doctor of Arts
DBA – Doctor of Business Administration
D.D. – Doctor of Divinity
Ed.D. – Doctor of Education
EngD or DEng - Doctor of Engineering
DFA – Doctor of Fine Arts
DMA – Doctor of Musical Arts
D.Min. – Doctor of Ministry
D.Mus. – Doctor of Music
D.Prof – Doctor of Professional Studies
DPA – Doctor of Public Administration
D.Sc. – Doctor of Science
JD – Doctor of Jurisprudence
LL.D. – Doctor of Laws
MD – Doctor of Medicine
DO-Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
Pharm.D. – Doctor of Pharmacy
Ph.D. / D.Phil. – Doctor of Philosophy
PsyD – Doctor of Psychology
Th.D. – Doctor of Theology
Doctorates within the field of medicine:
DC
DDS – Doctor of Dental Surgery
DMD – Doctor of Dental Medicine
O.D.
DPT
DPM
DVM

Master
MArch – Master of Architecture
MA – Master of Arts
MAL – Master of Liberal Arts
MBA – Master of Business Administration
MPA – Master of Public Administration
MPS - Master of Public Service
MPl – Master of Planning
MChem – Master in Chemistry
MC - Master of Counselling
M. Des - Master of Design
MDiv – Master of Divinity
MDrama - Master of Drama
MDS – Master of Dental Surgery
MEd – Master of Education
MET - Master of Educational Technology
MEng – Master of Engineering
MFA – Master of Fine Arts
MHA - Master of Healthcare Administration
MHist - Master of History
LL.M. – Master of Law
MLA - Master of Landscape Architecture
MMath – Master of Mathematics
MPhil – Master of Philosophy
MRes – Master of Research
MSc – Master of Science
MScBMC - Master of Biomedical Communications
MPhys – Master of Physics
MPharm - Master of Pharmacy
MPH - Master of Public Health
MSE – Master of Science in Engineering
MSRE – Master of Science in Real Estate
MSW - Master of Social Work
Magister – Magister
S.T.M. - Master of Sacred Theology
ThM – Master of Theology
MURP – Master of Urban and Regional Planning


== See also ==
Byzantine aristocracy and bureaucracy
Corporate title
Ethiopian aristocratic and religious titles
False titles of nobility
Hereditary title
Honorific
Index of religious honorifics and titles
Military rank
Nobility
Peerage
Political institutions of Rome
Post-nominal letters
Pre-nominal letters
Royal and noble ranks
Royal and noble styles
Suffix (name)
Style (manner of address)
Title of honor


== Notes ==


== References ==
African Kings by Daniel Lainé
Keepers of the Kingdom by Alastair Bruce, Julian Calder, and Mark Cator
Master and Commander, film directed by Peter Weir
Realter Society