Final Fantasy: Legend of the Crystals (ファイナルファンタジー, Fainaru Fantajī) is an anime OVA based on the Final Fantasy series of role-playing video games. It was released in Japan in 1994 and distributed by Urban Vision in 1997 in North America on VHS. Urban Vision have since lost the distribution license and to date the series hasn't been released in any other format, such as DVD, following its initial video release.
Legend of the Crystals takes place 200 years after the events of Final Fantasy V. It is divided into four thirty-minute OVA episodes spanning two VHS tapes.


== Plot ==
The story takes place on the same world as Final Fantasy V, named Planet R, set two hundred years in the future, where three of the four crystals have been stolen. The original heroes in Final Fantasy V are now legends of the past and a new evil, Deathgyunos, has risen on the Black Moon and must be dealt with. Mid, a recurring character from Final Fantasy V, contacts a new hero and heroine: Prettz and Linaly (a descendant of Bartz). They eventually meet the sky pirate Rouge and Valkus, commander of the Iron Wing.


== Characters ==
The OVA introduces several original characters and a few characters who made an appearance in Final Fantasy V.
The main protagonist Prettz is a headstrong and reckless young man with feelings for Linaly who rides a motorcycle and uses a nodachi and spiked bombs as his weapons. The other protagonist Linaly is a brave, young, blue-haired girl, the direct descendant of Bartz and a novice in the art of summoning (she can only summon Chocobo), and became a vessel for the Wind Crystal after the others were taken. Supporting characters include: Valkus is the bumbling general of the Tycoon air force, leading the flag-airship Iron Wing, who, despite his aggressiveness and large size, is fiercely loyal to Queen Lenna; Rouge, a scantily clad sky pirate captain, with a love for all things shiny, who attempted to take the Wind Crystal from Linaly and company, but was captured by Tycoon and held prisoner until Queen Lenna offered her a full pardon if she agreed to aid the others; and Mid, Cid's grandson, an engineer who returns as a ghost to aid the heroes with his advice and general knowledge of historical events important to the series, and, although apparently unable to physically manipulate the world in this state, is clever enough to convince his living allies to complete tasks with words alone.
The antagonist of Final Fantasy: Legend of the Crystals is Ra Devil, a powerful wizard intent on gaining the power of the Void for his own ambition. He steals Cid's brain away in hopes of using its knowledge of the four Crystals to his advantage, assuming his true form, Deathgyunos, once he succeeds.


== Production ==


=== Music ===
The original score was composed by Masahiko Sato and contains numerous cues to Nobuo Uematsu's original soundtrack to Final Fantasy V including the opening and the Chocobo theme.


=== Episodes ===
Legend of the Crystals is separated into 4 individually titled episodes:
Episode I - Wind Chapter
Episode II - Fire Chapter
Episode III - Dragon Chapter
Episode IV - Star Chapter
In VHS format, Episodes I and II were contained on the first video, with episodes III and IV on the second, later released as a boxed set.


=== Voice actors ===


== Reception ==
The OVA has had mixed reviews. IGN described it as notable for being the first sequel to a Final Fantasy title, but stated it "did not become a favourite addition to the Final Fantasy Legacy", citing its animation as "nothing special" and noting its reliance on comedy over dramatic story telling. T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews called it "a cruel mockery of all Final Fantasy stands for", citing it as basing the storyline off the "weakest" title in the series, and citing the finale as anti-climactic and the villain disappointing. Animefringe criticized it as one of several failed attempts to translate Final Fantasy to film, calling it a "lacklustre and drawn-out retelling of Final Fantasy V". Kotaku called the film "a mess" for its un-Final Fantasy aesthetic and fan service.
However, GameSpot described it as a worthy adaptation of the series, and noted while the animation was "somewhat simple", the story was immersive and praised it for not meandering to include all aspects of the game. EX praised the title heavily, noting the similarity to Square's existing characters helped lend credence to the Final Fantasy title. They additionally noted with exception to the backgrounds the animation was good, and the dubbed voices for the English version were believable, notably Linaly's and Prettz's, and added "Final Fantasy provides a good balance of action, adventure, and just enough humour to make the characters personable."


== See also ==
List of Square Enix franchises


== References ==