Logoplaste is a Portuguese company, producing rigid plastic containers.
Logoplaste was incorporated in 1976, pioneering in-house manufacturing in Europe, with the “Hole in the Wall” concept. ("Hole in the Wall" is industry jargon, describing the process of building the plant that manufactures a product's plastic packaging immediately next door to the plant where it is manufactured, as an addition to their building, reducing shipping costs.) Managing 63 plants today, Logoplaste is headquartered in Cascais.


== History ==
1976 – Start of the operations with Yoplait (yoghurts) and Nestlé (caps)
1980 – First large scale PVC operation in mineral water (Luso)
1989 – First PET operation with Coca-Cola in Portugal
1993 – First thin wall operation with Unilever in Portugal
1994 - Logoplaste goes International in Spain, with mineral waters
1995 – Start up of the Brazilian operation with Danone
1997 – Logoplaste enters the French market with an in-house plant operation for Coke and the first PET pre-form plant is started in Portugal, producing today over 900 million units per year
1998 – Logoplaste arrives in the UK market, with one large plant for Procter & Gamble. A similar plant for P&G is installed in Barcelona, Spain
2000 – A complex factory, incorporating injection and blowing of PET pre-forms is installed near London, producing Fairy Liquid bottles for the whole of Europe
2002 - LOGOPLASTE creates ILAB (LOGOPLASTE Innovation Lab). This structure concentrates activities of development for the group. Headquarters in Cascais/Portugal
2002 – Start up of the manufacturing of aseptic packages for UHT Milk in France and large size packages for Automotive Lubricants in Brazil
2003 – Start up of operations in Italy, with a large implant for Unilever household care products
2004 - Start up of operations with Arla Foods, in Leeds, manufacturing bottles for one of the most modern fresh milk factory in Europe.
2006 - Start of operations in North America with the purchase from Tetrapak of the Ottawa, Ontario, Canada blowing facility making flavoured milk and coffee additives bottles for the Neilson dairy.
2007 - Second North American plant in operation producing edible oil bottles for Sovena USA.
2009 - Start of operations in Vancouver and Edmonton Canada, manufacturing various HDPE milk jugs.
2010 - Start of operations in Coleford, Wales, producing PET products for GSK
2010 - Karl Hare is appointed Technical Training Manager for Logoplaste UK
- Creates ILAB USA. Development Branch of ILAB that will support activities of development in North America
2011 - LOGOPLASTE signs contracts for Vietnam. LOGOPLASTE has now 61 plants world wide.
- Creates ILAB Brazil. Development Branch for Brazil and Latin America


== External links ==
Logoplaste