Glenfield Hospital, formally known as Glenfield General Hospital, is situated near Glenfield, on the outskirts of Leicester. It is one of England's main hospitals for coronary care and respiratory diseases. It is a tertiary referral University teaching hospital with a strong international reputation for medical research in cardiac and respiratory health.


== Location ==
Glenfield Hospital is located at the junction of the A50 and the A563 (Leicester Ringroad). On the same site is Leicester Frith Hospital, Leicestershire Breastcare and the Bradgate Unit. Gorse Hill Ambulance Station (formerly Gorse Hill Hospital) is on the same site, accessed from Anstey Lane.


== History ==
Glenfield was built as a replacement for the old Groby Road Hospital, which was located about 500m up the road at Heathley Park (now a housing estate). LOROS hospice is still on the Groby Road site. Glenfield comes under the University Hospitals Leicester NHS Trust. Other members are Leicester Royal Infirmary and Leicester General Hospital (Evington). Glenfield also has intensive care (CITU and GITU), children's wards, respiratory care, operating theatres, and many other departments. However, it does not have an emergency department.


== East Midlands Congenital Heart Centre ==
In July 2012 it was announced that the East Midlands Congenital Heart Centre which served 5 million people and treated 230 children and 70 adults a year, would close in order to focus surgical expertise in fewer locations. The unit would however continue to provide diagnosis and non-surgical treatment. The unit had the largest ECMO unit in the UK and had been in operation for 20 years and a petition to save it attracted 100,000 signatures. In a letter to Andrew Lansley, ECMO expert Kenneth Palmer of the Karolinska University Hospital in Stockholm warned that about 50 babies and children will die over a five-year period if treatment moved to Birmingham. Palmer said that Leicester and Stockholm were world-leading ECMO centres with survival rates about 10% to 20% higher than the normal rate elsewhere.
In August 2012, it was announced that the hospital had carried out the world's first percutaneous coronary intervention procedure on a two-year-old child. The child had been born with hypoplastic left heart syndrome, a deformed left heart and had had two heart operations before his first birthday. A life-threatening clot had formed in the heart and was successfully removed drawing on the combined experience of pediatric and adult interventional cardiologists. The combined expertise may not be available in alternate facilities if Glenfield children's cardiac care unit closes. Campaigners in Leeds won a legal challenge criticising the fairness and legality of the review process in March 2013 and the plans were suspended in June "as the decision was based on a flawed analysis."


== References ==


== External links ==
Glenfield Hospital