Project Censored is a media research, education, and advocacy initiative started at Sonoma State University in 1976, currently housed at Diablo Valley College in Pleasant Hill, California. Project Censored was founded by Professor Carl Jensen to expose censorship in propaganda and mass media. Jensen named Professor Peter Phillips his successor, who then enlisted professors Mickey Huff and Andy Lee Roth. They have expanded Project Censorship to approximately two dozen university and college campuses across the United States, which is now the current size. Among its journalistic activities is the publication of news stories omitted or significantly under-reported by other media sources. 


== ReceptionEdit ==
Walter Cronkite said that "Project Censored is one of the organizations that we should listen to, to be assured that our newspapers and our broadcasting outlets are practicing thorough and ethical journalism".
The founder of the progressive news analysis and commentary website AlterNet criticized Project Censored as "stuck in the past" with a "dubious selection process" that "reinforces self-marginalizing, defeatist behavior". It has also been criticized for reporting on stories which are arguably not "under-reported" or "censored" at all, as they have sometimes appeared in the New York Times and other high-profile publications.
Some of these claims come from other progressive publications, such as AlterNet, Mother Jones, and New Politics that are concerned that the Project's mis-reporting will give the progressive movement and its alternative media less credibility. For example, Project Censored has been criticized for consistently downplaying Serbian atrocities in Bosnia and Kosovo, for exaggerating the dangers of the Cassini-Huygens space probe to Saturn, and for giving support to 9/11 conspiracy theories.
Professor Robert Jensen and journalist Norman Solomon resigned from Project Censored's panel of national judges over the decision to highlight the 9/11 conspiracy theories of Steven E. Jones, a founder of Scholars for 9/11 Truth, in Censored 2007.
In a debate with Project Censored's Associate Director Mark Lowenthal, Jack Shafer wrote that Project Censored had "an overbearing left-wing bias -- a fact belied by its refusal to review stories from the right-wing or conservative press, the openly partisan nature of the stories that are selected and the leftist panel of judges who help select them."


== Lists of winnersEdit ==


=== Projects listed by year (top ten)Edit ===
2014
Ocean Acidification
Top 10 U.S. Aid Recipients Practice Torture
Trans-Pacific Partnership: A Secret Deal to Help Corporations
Corporate Interest Providers Threaten Net Neutrality
Bankers Remain on Wall Street Despite Major Crimes
The 'Deep State' of Plutocratic Control
FBI Dismisses Plot Against Occupy as NSA Cracks Down on Dissent
Ignoring Extreme Weather Connection to Global Warning
U.S. Media Hypocrisy in Covering Ukraine Crisis
World Health Organization Suppresses Report on Iraq Impacts
2013
[Bradley] Manning and the Failure of Corporate Media
The Richest Global 1 Percent Hide Billions in Tax Havens
Trans-Pacific Partnership
Obama's War on Whistle-Blowers
Hate Groups and Anti-Government Groups on Rise Across U.S.
Billionaires' Rising Wealth Intensified Poverty and Inequality
Merchant of Death and Nuclear Weapons
Bank Interests Inflate Global Prices by 35 to 40 Percent
Icelanders Vote to Include Commons in Their Constitution
A "Culture of Cruelty" Along the Mexico-U.S. Border
2001
Corporations Threaten to Take Over the Airwaves
GATS' For-Profit Model Threatens to Gobble Up the World's Water
U.S. Policy Funds Human Rights Abuses in Colombia
Bush Administration Ordered FBI Off Bid Laden Trail
U.S. Destruction of Iraqi Water Supply
Renewed Threat of Nuclear Warfare
Public Schools Become Guinea Pigs for HMO Model
NAFTA Impoverishes Small Family Farmers
Housing Crisis in the U.S.
CIA Spooks Destabilize Macedonia
2000
World Bank and Multinational Corporations Seek to Privatize Water
OSHA Fails to Protect U.S. Workers
U.S. Army's Psychological Operations Personnel Worked at CNN
Did the U.S. Deliberately Bomb the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade?
U.S. Taxpayers Underwrite Global Nuclear Power Plant Sales
International Report Blames U.S. and Others for Genocide in Rwanda
Independent Study Points to Dangers of Genetically-Altered Foods
Drug Companies Influence Doctors and Health Organizations to Push Meds
EPA Plans to Disburse Toxic/Radioactive Wastes into Denver's Sewage System
Silicon Valley Uses Immigrant Engineers to Keep Salaries Low
1999
Secret International Trade Agreement Undermines the Sovereignty of Nations
Chemical Corporations Profit Off Breast Cancer
Monsanto's Genetically Modified Seeds Threaten World Production
Recycled Radioactive Metals May Be in Your Home
U.S. Weapons Mass Destruction Linked to the Deaths of a Half-Million Children
U.S. Nuclear Subverts U.N.'s Comprehensive Test Ban Treat[y]
Gene Transfers Linked to Dangerous New Diseases
Catholic Hospital Threaten Mergers Reproductive Rights for Women
U.S. Tax Dollars Support Death Squads in Chiapas
Environmental Student Activists Gunned Down on Chevron Oil Facility in Nigeria


=== Notable people and mediaEdit ===
Joel Bleifuss
Dave Lindorff, 2004
Rock Creek Free Press, 2008


== See alsoEdit ==
Secrecy News
Junk food news


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
[1] Project Censored website
[2] Project Censored's 2015 list
[3] Critical article concerning Project Censored's 2000 list
[4] "Project Censored: The Movie," IMDb