Alangad is a village in Paravur Taluk, Ernakulam District, in the Indian state of Kerala. It is right in the middle of North Paravur and Aluva. The Kochi city is 15 km away.


== Etymology ==
The name Alangad has been derived from "alam" means sugarcane.


== History ==
Alangad was once famous in the state for its sugarcane fields. In the past Alangad was a small kingdom ruled by the Alangad Kings. Visscher refers the battle that took place between the Alangad King and the Paravoor (N.Parur) King in his 'Letters from Malabar' written in 1720CE. Years back Alangad had its own place in the agricultural industry. The village was scenic with its greenery and was covered almost entirely with vast expanses of paddy fields and Coconut trees. Later on the advent of red bricks business made the paddy fields almost vanish literally. The village was blessed with fertile soil, which gave good crops for all types of agriculture. The place is situated on the banks of River Periyar, which is called as "Muttupuzha"(knee river) in this area as it used to have knee deep water during summers and people could cross it on foot.But now since huge amount of sand is taken from the river bed its no more shallow or safe to walk through even in summers. The former rulers of Alangand was known as "Alangadu Karthakal"


== Economy ==
Alangad is located just 7 km away from North Paravur and 8 km away from Aluva. The State Highway connecting North Paravur with Perumbavoor passes through this village. Once clay brick business was the main trade as clay was available. Major heavy mechanical vehicles, bus and small cars have their warehouses and PDI centers on the Perumbavoor - Parur highway.
One of the major economy for the whole panchayath is from the remittances of expatriate community.
Business:
T.V.Sundram Iyengar & Sons Ltd. Alangad
NMD (Neerikode Milk Dairy)


== Education ==
Schools
Wisdom College, Kottappuram
KEM High School, Kottappuram, Alangad.
Infant Jesus Senior secondary School Alangad.
ALANGAD JAMAATH PUBLIC SCHOOL.KARUMALOOR
Little Flower High School Panayikulam.
LP School, Thiruvalloor.
St. Mary's LP School Alangad.
Govt. HSS Kongorpilly
LP School Neerikode
LP School Olanad
LP School Panayikulam
SNP School Koduvazhanga
Sri Sai Vidya Vihar School


== Religious ==
Temples
Sri Alungal Bhagavathy Temple Veliyathunad
Thiruvaloor Mahadeva temple
Keezhanikkavu Vishnu - Bhagavathi Temple Thiruvalloor
Marayil Bhagavathy Temple, Koduvazhanga
Neerikodu Siva Temple : A temple became history, through the court verdict.
Sree Krishnapuram Temple, Kottapuram
Iravipuram Temple, Kottapuram
Vettakaaran Sree Mahadeva Temple, Alangad
Alangad Devi Temple, Alangad
Kunnil Sree Dharma Sastha Temple
Kaarukunnu Sree Dharma Sastha Temple
Aattuvatrikovil - Vaathurakkavu Devi Temple
Kottayathukav Devi Temple,kottappuram
Chirangara Mahadeva Temple
Purappilly kavu, Karumalloor
Kollaparamb Sree Dharma Shastha Temple,Kottapuram
Churches
Infant Jesus Church, Kunnel.
St. Mary's Church Alangad
St. Joseph Church Neericode
St. Sebastian Church Neerikode
Little Flower Church Panayikulam
St. Antony Church Kongorpilly
St. Thomas Church Karumalloor

Masjids
Alangad masjid
Panayikulam masjid
Methanam masjid
Malikampeedika
Kottapuram
Karingamthuruth


== Important Roads ==
Parur - Perumbavoor road
Kottappuram - Koonammavu road
Edayar - Panayikulam road
Kadungallur - Kongorpilly road
Kongorpilly - Olanad road
Neerikode - Thattampady Road
Parur - Karingamthuruth - Aluva road


== Localities ==
Neerikode, Koduvazhanga, Iravipuram, Kottapuram, Malikampeedika, Alangad, Thiruvalloor, Kunnel, Panayikulam, Methanam, Chirayam, Kongorppilly, Olanad, Thirumuppam, Pazhampilly, Karingamthuruth, Karukunnu


== Notable People ==
M.N. Soman
A. Mathias Mundadan
Mar Varghese Payyappilly Palakkappilly, Former vicar of Alangad St. Mary's Church
G Sreedharan Pillai (Rtd, Post Master)
P.S.Kalyanakrishnan.
V.K.Ebrahim Kunju(PWD Minister)
Syamkrishnaprasad.s
Adv.Jose Vithayathil (Member, KCDRC, TVM)
Adv.Mani Vithayathil (Former Chairman, KSFE)
Ambat Hariharan (Rtd, Excise Inspector, Former President of Karukunnu Dharma shasta Temple)
Mr.T.A Kumara pillai (Rtd.Teacher)
Mr. Vinod Rajasekharan Menon
Mr. Vaishakh Vinod Menon


== See also ==
North Paravur
Paravur Taluk
Ernakulam District
Kochi
Koonammavu


== References ==