Ethnologue: Languages of the World is a web-based publication that contains statistics for 7,469 languages and dialects in its 18th edition, which was released in 2015. Of these, 7,102 are listed as living and 367 are listed as extinct Up until the 16th edition in 2009, the publication was a printed volume. Ethnologue provides information on the number of speakers, location, dialects, linguistic affiliations, availability of the Bible in each language and dialect described, and an estimate of language viability using the Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale (EGIDS).
The publication is well respected and widely used by linguists.


== OverviewEdit ==
Ethnologue is published by SIL International (formerly known as the Summer Institute of Linguistics), a Christian linguistic service organization based in Dallas, Texas. The organization studies numerous minority languages in order to facilitate language development and work with the speakers of such language communities in translating portions of the Bible into their language.
What counts as a language depends upon socio-linguistic evaluation; as the preface to Ethnologue says, "Not all scholars share the same set of criteria for what constitutes a 'language' and what features define a 'dialect'." Ethnologue follows general linguistic criteria, which are based primarily on mutual intelligibility. Shared language intelligibility features are complex, and usually include etymological and grammatical evidence that is agreed upon by experts.
In addition to choosing a primary name for a language, Ethnologue gives some of the names that its speakers, governments, foreigners and neighbors use for it, and also describes how the language has been named and referenced historically, regardless of whichever designation is considered official, politically correct or offensive.
In 1984, Ethnologue released a three-letter coding system, called a "SIL code", to identify each language that it described. This set of codes significantly exceeded the scope of previous standards, e.g. ISO 639-1. The 14th edition, published in 2000, included 7,148 language codes, which generally did not match the ISO 639-2 codes.
In 2002, Ethnologue was asked to work with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) to integrate its codes into a draft international standard. The 15th edition of Ethnologue was the first edition to use this standard, called ISO 639-3, and since then Ethnologue relies on this standard to determine what is a language. However, there is not complete concordance between ISO and Ethnologue. For example, ISO considers Akan to be a macrolanguage consisting of two distinct languages, Twi and Fante, whereas Ethnologue considers Twi and Fante to be dialects of a single language (Akan).
With the 17th edition, Ethnologue introduced a numerical code for language status using a framework called EGIDS (Extended Graded Inter-generational Disruption Scale), an elaboration of Fishman’s GIDS (Graded Inter-generational Disruption Scale), which ranks a language from 0 for an international language to 10 for an extinct language, i.e. a language with which no-one retains a sense of ethnic identity.


== EditionsEdit ==
Starting with the 18th edition, new editions of Ethnologue are to be published every year.


== Language familiesEdit ==
Ethnologue's 18th edition describes 228 language families (including 96 language isolates) and six typological categories (deaf sign languages, creoles, pidgins, mixed languages, constructed languages, and as yet unclassified languages).


== ReputationEdit ==
In 1986, William Bright, then editor of Language: Journal of the Linguistic Society of America, wrote of Ethnologue that it "is indispensable for any reference shelf on the languages of the world". In 2008 in the same journal, Lyle Campbell and Verónica Grondona said: "Ethnologue...has become the standard reference, and its usefulness is hard to overestimate." However, in 2015, Harald Hammarström added a caveat to this positivity. "While hundreds of spurious and missing languages can be documented for Ethnologue", he wrote, "it is at present still better than any other nonderivative work of the same scope, in all aspects but one. Ethnologue fails to disclose the sources for the information presented, at odds with well-established scientific principles."


== See alsoEdit ==
Linguasphere Observatory Register
Glottolog
Lists of languages
List of language families


== CitationsEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==
Martin Everaert; Simon Musgrave; Alexis Dimitriadis, eds. (2009-03-26). The Use of Databases in Cross-Linguistic Studies. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 9783110198744. Retrieved 2014-07-13. 


== Further readingEdit ==
Skutnabb-Kangas, Tove (2001). Linguistic Genocide in Education-or Worldwide Diversity and Human Rights?. Routledge. ISBN 9781135662356. Retrieved 2014-07-13. 
Paolillo, John C.; Das, Anupam (31 March 2006). "Evaluating language statistics: the Ethnologue and beyond" (PDF). UNESCO Institute of Statistics. pp. 3–5. Retrieved 8 October 2015. 


== External linksEdit ==
Web version of The Ethnologue