A chemistry set is an educational toy allowing the user (typically a teenager) to perform simple chemistry experiments.
Some of the earliest chemistry sets were developed in the 18th century in England and Germany, for use in teaching. More modern chemistry sets from the 1900s were intended to be toys. The best known such sets were produced by the A. C. Gilbert Company, an early and middle 20th-century American manufacturer of educational toys. Porter Chemical Company, with the Chemcraft sets, and the Skilcraft corporation were other manufacturers. Well known chemistry sets from the United Kingdom include the 1960s and 1970s sets by Thomas Salter Science (produced in Scotland) and later Salter Science, then the "MERIT" sets through the 1970s and 1980s. Dekkertoys created a range of sets which were similar, complete with glass test tubes of dry chemicals. The modern offerings, with a few exceptions, tend to have less in the way of chemicals and very simplified instructions. A GCSE equipment set was produced offering students better quality equipment, and there is also a more up market range of sets available from Thames & Kosmos such as the C3000 Kit.
Several authors have noted that from the 1980s on, concerns about illegal drug production, terrorism and legal liability have led to chemistry sets becoming increasingly bland and unexciting.


== Contents ==
Typical contents found in chemistry sets, including equipment and chemicals, might include:


=== Equipment ===
vials of dry chemicals
wires or filings of various metals, as copper, nickel or zinc
graphite rods
a balance and weights
a measuring cylinder
a thermometer
a magnifying glass
pipettes
beakers, retorts, flasks, test tubes, U-tubes or other reaction vessels
cork stoppers
watch glasses
glass and rubber tubing
test tube holders, retort stands and clamps
an alcohol burner or other heat source
a filter funnel and filter paper
universal indicator paper or litmus paper
safety goggles
an instruction manual


=== Chemicals ===

The experiments described in the instruction manual typically require a number of chemicals not shipped with the chemistry set, because they are common household chemicals:
Acetic acid (in vinegar)
Ammonium carbonate ("baker's ammonia" or "salts of hartshorn")
Citric acid (in lemons)
Ethanol (in denatured alcohol)
Sodium bicarbonate (baking soda)
Sodium chloride ("table salt")
Other chemicals, including strong acids, bases and oxidizers cannot be safely shipped with the set and others having a limited shelf life have to be purchased separately from a drug store:
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrogen peroxide
Silver nitrate
Sodium hydroxide


== See also ==
Amateur chemistry
List of commonly available chemicals


== References ==


== External links ==
The History of Chemistry Sets
Education for a New Generation: The Chemistry Set in History (Video) from the Chemical Heritage Foundation
The Grinch Who Stole the Chemistry Set
Chemistry Sets and Home Chemistry