A spritzer is a tall, chilled drink, usually made with white wine and carbonated water or sparkling mineral water.


== OriginEdit ==
The Spritzer comes from Hungary from a little city Fót nearby Budapest where Ányos Jedlik the well known Hungarian inventor met with other well known Hungarians as Mihály Vörösmarty, András Fáy and Géza Hegedűs on 5th of October 1842 for the fall harvest. Ányos Jedlik didn't liked the wine purely so he promoted to mix it up half wine half soda water and he named the drink "Spritzer" and then Mihály Vörösmarty give the name widely known name "Fröccs" to the drink. It is used alongside the equally common form Gespritzter (mostly pronounced G'spritzter, a noun derived from the past participle of spritzen, i.e. squirt), a term also found in some German regions, such as Hessen (e.g. Süssgespritzter, i.e. a "sweet spritzer" using fizzy lemonade instead of soda water (Sauergespritzter)). In most of Germany, the word "Schorle" is used to denote a Spritzer.


== Alcoholic spritzersEdit ==
The word comes from the German spritzen "spatter, squirt, spray, sprinkle", i.e. adding water and thus diluting the wine so that it can be consumed in larger, thirst-quenching amounts.
Alcoholic spritzers are increasingly available ready-mixed in cans; their relatively low alcohol and calorific content means they are often marketed at women.
In Hessen, "gespritzt" usually refers to a mixture of soda water or lemonade and Apfelwein (in Central Hessian dialect, Ebblwoi), an alcoholic drink from fermented apple juice somewhat similar to dry hard cider.
In Hungary spritzer is called 'fröccs' (pronounced similar to the surname of famous British boxer Carl Froch) and is very popular. There are dozens of different types of spritzer. They are distinguished by the proportion of wine and carbonated water or the type of other liquids added. Examples (the list is not exhaustive) include:
Kisfröccs or Fütty ('short spritzer' or whistle), made with 1dl of wine and 1dl of carbonated soda water;
Nagyfröccs ('full spritzer'), made with 2dl of wine and 1dl of carbonated soda water;
Hosszúlépés ('long step'), made with 1dl of wine and 2dl of carbonated soda water;
Házmester ('concierge'), made with 3dl of wine and 2dl of carbonated soda water;
Háziúr ('landlord spritzer'), made with 4dl of wine and 1dl of carbonated soda water;
Viceházmester ('vice concierge'), made with 2dl of wine and 3dl of carbonated soda water;
Sportfröccs ('sport spritzer'), made with 1dl of wine and 4dl of carbonated soda water;
Krúdy fröccs ('Krudy spritzer'), made with 9dl of wine and 1dl of carbonated soda water;
Polgármester ('mayor'), made with 6dl of wine and 4dl of carbonated soda water;
Maflás ('clout'), made with 5dl of wine and 5dl of carbonated soda water;
Alpolgármester ('vice mayor'), made with 4dl of wine and 6dl of carbonated soda water;
Távolugrás ('long jump'), made with 1dl of wine and 9dl of carbonated soda water;
Újházy fröcss ('Ujhazy spritzer'), made with 2dl of wine and a special pickle juice; and,
Macifröccs ('teddy bear spritzer'), made with red wine, soda and raspberry syrup.
Other variations include: şpriţ de vară (or "summer spritzer") in Romania (1 part white wine to 2 parts sparkling water), Spritzer in Slovenia (wine and the popular domestic mineral water Radenska), "špricer" in Serbia (white wine or rosé, mixed with sparkling water, half of glass of each). In Croatia, a popular drink called gemišt is mixed with white wine and sparkling water to taste.
In north-eastern regions of Italy, especially Venice and surroundings, a spritz is a popular light cocktail, a mix of sparkling white wine (e.g., Prosecco), sparkling water, and Aperol, Bitter Campari, or other colored alcohols.


== Non-alcoholic spritzerEdit ==
In the United States, some non-alcoholic carbonated juices are sold as spritzers. The same type of carbonated juice (actually made with juice and carbonated mineral water) is known in Germany as Saftschorle or Fruchtschorle. (Both short for rarely used Fruchtsaftschorle.) Particularly Apfelschorle (apple juice spritzer) is one of the most popular soft drinks in Germany. In Austria Apfelschorle is called Apfelsaft g'spritzt. ... g'spritzt can be combined with every juice, e.g. Orangensaft g'spritzt or Pago/Cappy g'spritzt (producers of juices).


== See alsoEdit ==

Alcoholic beverage
Shandy
Wine cooler


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
 Media related to Spritzer at Wikimedia Commons