Hypersonic XLC was a roller coaster located at Kings Dominion in Doswell, Virginia. Hypersonic was the first compressed air launch coaster in the world. In 2007, Hypersonic XLC was closed and later dismantled. The platform is all that remains at the ride's former location between the Hurler and Grizzly roller coasters.
Hypersonic was built by S&S Worldwide, a company specializing in air-powered rides such as Skyhawk and Power Tower, both located at Cedar Point. Hypersonic was S&S Worldwide's actual prototype for an air-launched coaster, called Thrust Air 2000. The ride was originally fabricated by Intermountain Lift, Inc. It was reconstructed at Kings Dominion after being moved from its original location in Utah. S&S Worldwide also greatly modified the section following the 90째 drop to accommodate Kings Dominion's landscape and to properly bank the turn. Hypersonic XLC suffered extended downtime, and was closed for nearly three months at the beginning of Kings Dominion's 2002 season.


== Ride experienceEdit ==
After a launch from 0 to 80 mph (130 km/h) in 1.8 seconds up a 90째 incline, the ride crested a 165-foot (50 m) hill, and without fully slowing, plummeted down an 90째 dive. Next, the coaster performed a banked left turn, went through a smaller banked right turn, and skirted a small hill before heading into the brake run.


== Launch systemEdit ==
Hypersonic XLC's launch system was comparatively new technology utilizing compressed air to launch the ride train. It is very similar to the launch system used to launch Space Shot rides, also developed by S&S Worldwide. Characteristics of compressed air launches are shorter runways and quicker acceleration, when compared to hydraulic and LIM/LSM launch platforms.
The compressed air launch system is used on the world's fastest accelerating ride, Dodonpa, which accelerates to 107 mph (172 km/h) in just 1.8 seconds. It was also used on ring째racer. Rides such as Kingda Ka and Top Thrill Dragster have a higher top speed than Dodonpa, but Dodonpa is the ride with the quickest acceleration.


== Current statusEdit ==
During the 2006 off-season, Kings Dominion put Hypersonic XLC up for sale. In January 2008, the park removed Hypersonic from its web site. On the park's opening day on March 22, 2008, Hypersonic XLC had been disassembled and was placed in its current laydown yard, along part of the park's back road. In May 2009, Kings Dominion marketing representative John Pagel stated that the coaster is still available for sale, either to another amusement park or as scrap metal.
The ride is now fully removed from Kings Dominion and has been recycled into something else. The ride's station, storage area, and some footers are still at the park to this day.


== ReferencesEdit ==