Band-Aid is a brand name of American pharmaceutical and medical devices giant Johnson & Johnson's line of adhesive bandages and related products.
Despite common misconception, Band-Aid is a genericized trademark in the United States. The term "band-aid" has entered usage as both a noun and verb describing a temporary fix. (E.g. "Band-aid solutions were used to fix the leak.")


== History ==
The Band-Aid was invented in 1920 by Thomas Anderson and Johnson & Johnson employee Earle Dickson for his wife Josephine, who frequently cut and burned herself while cooking. The prototype allowed her to dress her wounds without assistance. Dickson passed the idea on to his employer, which went on to produce and market the product as the Band-Aid. Dickson had a successful career at Johnson & Johnson, rising to vice president before his retirement in 1957.
The original Band-Aids were handmade and not very popular. By 1924, Johnson & Johnson introduced a machine that produced sterilized Band-Aids.
In 1920, the first adhesive bandages, Band-Aids, were modeled off of a tan or white tone. In 1951, the first decorative Band-Aids were introduced. They continue to be a commercial success, with such themes as Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Superman, Spider-Man, Hello Kitty, Rocket Power, Rugrats, smiley faces, Barbie, Dora the Explorer, Batman and Duck Dynasty. After a few decades passed, the creation of the first colored adhesive bandage was created. Michael Panayiotis, a New York entrepreneur, created an adhesive bandage called "Ebon-Aid" which was modeled off of a brown tone. Some bandage tones that were created were light brown, dark brown, and cinnamon. In addition to white toned and brown toned adhesive bandages, Band-Aid sells sheer strips for any color skin tone that can be purchased in stores or online.
In World War II, millions were shipped overseas, helping popularize the product. Since then, Johnson & Johnson currently has estimated a sale of over 100 billion Band-Aids worldwide. Panayiotis previously estimated a sale of 20,000 Ebon-Aid bandages by the year 2002. Due to his shortcoming of his goal of 1 million boxes sold, Panayiotis donated the surplus of remaining bandages and folded his company.
Trademark genericization eventually resulted in the "Band-Aid" trademark losing its protective status over the Johnson & Johnson brand, becoming a generic term for all adhesive bandages. The company attempted to avoid this outcome with an advertising campaign, but failed. One of the product's noted jingles was composed by Barry Manilow; the chorus is "I am stuck on Band-Aid brand 'cause Band-Aid's stuck on me!"


== Related products ==
Johnson & Johnson also manufactures liquid bandages, Scar Healing bandages, and Burn-Aid, burn gel-impregnated bandages. Their newest products include Active Flex bandages and waterproof Tough Strips.
To protect the name, their trademark, Johnson & Johnson always refers to its products as "Band-Aid brand", not just Band-Aids.
Manufacturing facilities are located in Brazil, China and Denmark.


== See also ==
Band Aid, a charity music group founded by Bob Geldof and Midge Ure.


== References ==


== External links ==
Band-Aid Brand Official Website
Band-Aid Brand History
Johnson & Johnson First Aid Website