Dwell is an American magazine devoted to modern architecture and design. It was launched in September 2000 by Lara Hedberg Deam with architecture and design critic Karrie Jacobs as its Editor-in-Chief. In August 2002 Jacobs left the magazine and was replaced by senior editor Allison Arieff. Following Arieff, Sam Grawe held the position from 2006 - 2011. Current Editor-in-Chief and EVP Content Amanda Dameron joined Dwell in 2008. Her work has been published in numerous domestic and international titles, from Condé Nast Traveler, Los Angeles Magazine, Urbis, Vogue Living and Elle Décor UK. As Editor-in-Chief of Dwell Media and EVP Content, she directs content across all the company's platforms, extending from print and digital to live events, e-commerce, research and other ancillary products.
Dwell is published 10 times a year (monthly except bi-monthly in December/January and July/August) by Dwell Media, LLC. Dwell Media also publishes three special interest publications annually. The current subscription is priced at $19.95 a year. According to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, by the close of 2005 the magazine's circulation exceeded 260,000, a 25.5 percent increase over 2004. President and CEO Michela O’Connor Abrams has capitalized on the magazine’s success by introducing a number of branded spin-offs, including Dwell digital properties—dwell.com and Dwell Store—as well as national events from modern home tours to the Dwell on Design® events in Los Angeles and New York City. A limited edition minimalist athletic sneaker designed by Medium Design Group and a weekly TV series on the Fine Living cable network were also in production for a short time. Approximately 50% of the pages in a typical issue of Dwell are used for advertising.


== Recognition ==
April 2005 National Magazine Award for General Excellence in the 100,000-to-250,000 circulation category.
March 2006 Adweek 2006 Creative Team of the Year award to creative director Claudia Bruno and photo editor Kate Stone 


== In popular culture ==
The Tumblr blog "Unhappy Hipsters", which launched in 2010, pairs photos from Dwell with humorous captions that mock the ascetic lifestyle suggested by some of the photos. The blog achieved significant popularity at the time, and its creators wrote a spinoff book in 2011, It's Lonely in the Modern World.The magazine was also mentioned in the 2012 episode "Tallahassee" of The Office.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Dwell on Design conference