Lamkang is one of the Naga tribes of Manipur, India, with one village in Burma. The Lamkangs are mostly settled in the south east part of manipur. The language is very much similar to Anal Naga, and has been influenced by Manipuri as the people have been acculturated.
Brief about Lamkang Tribe:
Lamkang tribe is one of the oldest tribes of Manipur. It is one of the nineteen Naga tribes living in Manipur. The members of this tribe are presently found in Manipur, Myanmar, Nagaland, Meghalaya and other parts of Indian city; but mostly, they are concentrated in the southern part of Manipur in the district of Chandel which is their original ancestral hometown. They are recognized as a scheduled tribe by the constitution of India since 1951. They speak Lamkang dialect which belongs to the Tibeto-Burman group of language while communicating within the tribe; and other languages such as Manipuri, Nagamese, English and Hindi to interact with people outside their tribe. It is believed that Lamkangs must have migrated from diizowl (literally translated: where the water stopped flowing. It could mean any river which finally merged with the ocean or sea to the south-east) into the present territory. While it is difficult to conclusively state the exact routes the Lamkangs must have undertaken enroute to their present settlement (in the pre-christian era) areas, it is fairly clear that they had lived close to the sea/ocean long enough to include the artefacts that are found only in seas and oceans in the world, in their culture. The Lamkang people are beautiful, peace loving, friendly, hospitable and believers in Christ. They have their own distinct culture both material and non-material; some of which are beautifully exhibited in their traditional attires. They are lovers of meat and fish and equally of leafy vegetables found in the beautiful hills surrounding their settlements. Modern Lamkangs are quite educated and are on the brink of a major transformation. The purpose of this group is to give Lamkangs from all walks of life and those associated with Lamkangs, a common platform; to share and exchange their ideas, views, and thoughts, etc, and in the process learnt more about the Lamkangs!
Website: lamkang.naga@facebook.com

        lamkang.people@facebook.com

lamkaang Website:- www.lamkaang.com (You will get all the information and get to know about lamkang).


== References ==