One Month is an online accelerated learning platform largely featuring technology-based courses. The company currently provides online tutorials for Ruby on Rails, HTML, CSS, Growth Hacking, iOS, Stripe (company), Web Security and Programming for Non-Programmers. The courses are designed to teach a programming language in 30 days. One Month has had over 150,000 lessons completed with more than 25,000 users, including representatives from Google, Stanford University, Duke University, Yale University, Harvard University, American Express, and JPMorgan Chase.


== History ==

One Month was founded in May 2013 by Chris Castiglione and Mattan Griffel. Chris Castiglione was previously a teacher of "Programming For Non-Programmers" at General Assembly and Columbia University and digital app developer for The Black Eyed Peas, Toyota, and American Express. Mattan Griffel created the Skillshare course "Teach Yourself to Code: One Month Rails."  The pair met while teaching at General Assembly in New York City. The company, based in New York City, was originally known as One Month Rails, and taught basic Ruby on Rails coding. It expanded to include other classes and became One Month. Griffel became CEO of One Month and was featured on the Forbes 30 under 30 list.
The two left their teaching positions when they were accepted to Y-Combinator.
By May 2013, the company had raised $770k in venture funding from Y Combinator, Maverick Capital, Lew Moorman, Innovation Works, General Catalyst Partners, Andreessen Horowitz, Winklevoss Capital Management, FundersClub, and Wefunder.
In December 2014, One Month acquired GoRails, a learning resource for Ruby on Rails. Chris Oliver, founder of GoRails and LaunchCode, joined the One Month team in New York to continue development of GoRails as an independent extension to the One Month program as lead engineer. The company launched a program in January 2015, which awards scholarships to women in the technology field to help bring more women into the industry. In June 2015, the company raised $1.9 million in a funding round led by Idea Bulb Ventures and Arena Ventures. Cornerstone OnDemand also participated as a strategic investor.


== References ==


== External links ==
One Month's website