Anti-M is a Santa Barbara based mostly electronic rock band. While the band has been releasing albums since 1992 their main claim to fame is having a rather famous guest guitarist. Ronnie Montrose, known for forming the band Montrose and starting the career of singer Sammy Hagar, played on the band's second album "Positively Negative". The band also released a CD of instrumental remixes (It H-Hurts) featuring alternate versions of the songs that Ronnie Montrose played on. The band's early discography includes "No Waves in Hell", "Positively Negative", "It H-Hurts, the Instrumentals", and a remastered version of "Positively Negative" that features two bonus track instrumentals that include Ronnie Montrose.
The album entitled, "Damage", was released in 2008. This album features a guest performance by Bassist Tim Landers who has played with various talent including Tori Amos, Vince Neil, Stevie Nicks, Al Di Meola and Billy Cobham to name a few. Landers can be heard during the guitar solo on the title track, Damage. The style of the album is dark and gothic with a mix of influences from bands like Within Temptation, Evanescence and electronica like Depeche Mode. In 2010 the band released a CD and download of alternate takes and unreleased songs titled "Damaged Little Things" 
Anti-M have provided music for several films. They include "You Only Die Once" ( A direct to video James Bond Spoof), "Hawaiian Surf Stories" (a series of surf films from North Shore Oahu) and The Bolt Who Screwed Christmas, an award winning animated short written and directed by Anti-M founding member John Wedge Wardlaw.


== Members ==
Jon (2005–present) Guitarist (formerly of Santa Barbara-based band Psycho Graffiti with vocalist Jeffrey Winslow, who is now the lead vocalist for San Francisco Bay Area hard rock band Syrym (official site))
Barbara (1995–present) Vocals, Guitar, Bass
Ruston (1992–present) Keyboards, Vocals Bass
John Wedge Wardlaw (1986–present) Keyboards, Vocals, Guitar, Bass
Steve Salty Weber (1992-1995) Guitar
Mark Rumer (1986-1995) Keyboards, Programming, Voice
Derek Poultney (2005–present) Drums and Drum Programming


== Guest Performers ==
Ronnie Montrose (1995) Guitars on Positively Negative
Tim Landers (2005) Bass on Damage
Nan Avant (2013) Piano for upcoming project "Pieces"
Dru -Vocalist for This Ascension and Mirabilis- (2013) Vocals for upcoming project "Pieces"


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


== References ==


== External links ==
The band's web site
The band's youtube music video page
The band's myspace page
The Band's Facebook Page