"Lil' Crime Stoppers" is the sixth episode of the seventh season of the American animated television series South Park, and the 102nd episode of the series overall. It first aired on Comedy Central April 23, 2003. In the episode, Stan, Kyle, Cartman and Kenny start a Junior Detective's Club and are soon recruited by the Park County police department. However, the boys soon find out that being real detectives isn't as fun as they thought.


== Plot ==
Stan, Kyle, Cartman and Kenny decide to play detective; they go around the town solving minor "crimes" for a dollar. They first investigate the disappearance of a pie left sitting on the windowsill of an elderly couple's home. After examining the scene of the crime, they come to the conclusion (based on no evidence at all) that the husband planned to murder and dismember his wife to have the pie for himself; however, before he could go through with the plan, the pie had already been eaten by their dog, where the boys found it. Horrified by their outrageous accusations, the couple hurriedly send them away, but not before giving them the dollar they had promised.
The boys' next case involves the recovery of a little girl's stolen doll. After suspecting Butters for no particular reason and having him produce a semen sample, they get a tip-off that Bill and Fosse have the doll. They manage to recover the doll from them, despite several kids playing FBI asserting jurisdictional privilege and trying to take over the boys' case.
The recovery gets the boys recognized by the Park County PD, and they are made Junior Detectives. However, it's not just honorary. Lieutenant Dawson, the department's head lieutenant, flat-out hires them and then assigns them to bust a meth lab, something that should be reserved for actual detectives. With the boys not knowing what a meth lab is, Stan knocks on the door of the lab and simply calls out, "Uh, police. Open up." The criminals open fire at the boys, but just end up killing themselves, destroying the lab, and causing a great deal of property damage to the surrounding area.
Because of this incident, Dawson chews the boys out for 'getting careless'. Meanwhile, other detectives mock the boys, and it is revealed to them that many of the cops on the force are corrupt. The boys are then sent to the Peppermint Hippo, a strip club owned by Gino, the leader of Colorado's greatest drug cartel, who was behind the original meth lab. When they arrive, a bouncer takes them to Gino. When the cartel members notice that the boys are undercover cops, an intense shoot-out ensues, though the boys have nothing more than hands which they pretend are guns (while yelling "bang bang").
Three cops show up to give the boys backup, but it turns out that two of them (named Murphy and Jenkins) are working with Gino. During the shoot-out, they shoot Hopkins, the one good cop who defended the boys earlier, in the arm, though he survives. They then turn on Gino and kill him, so that they can get all the money together. However, Murphy kills Jenkins, turns to the boys, announces that the only person he cannot trust is himself, and commits suicide.
Finally, the boys are credited by Dawson with cleaning up the police force and are offered positions as full detectives. The boys, however, find reality more intense than their game, and decide to go back to playing laundromat instead. Butters later announces that he was finally able to produce a semen sample by imagining Stan's mom's breasts; however, because the boys are no longer playing detective anymore, they no longer want a semen sample, and thus, the entire ordeal is forgotten. Cartman, though, offers Butters to have his pants cleaned for $4.95.


== External links ==
Lil' Crime Stoppers Full episode at South Park Studios
Lil' Crime Stoppers Episode guide at South Park Studios
Lil' Crime Stoppers at the Internet Movie Database
Lil' Crime Stoppers at TV.com