At Sunset is an Australian pop rock band consisting of Harrison Kantarias, Andrew Kantarias and Tom Jay Williams. The band currently reside in Adelaide, South Australia and are signed to Razor Management.
All three boys have been around music all their life through various school bands, high school musicals and finally through the experience they are sharing now.
According to Harrison Kantarias the band name 'At Sunset' was decided upon because "the name is a metaphor for our feeling towards music. We like to be upbeat, positive and really just enjoying life. Playing music, setting suns, beaches, pools, girls in bikinis... it doesn't get better than that, does it?"


== Music career ==
At Sunset formed in January 2012, in Adelaide when University friends Harrison and Jae got together and started playing covers at their local pubs. During a rehearsal session, Harrison's brother, Andrew, joined in, and the current At Sunset lineup was created. They performed covers and posted them to YouTube, receiving social media attention for their cover of One Direction's One Thing, and have amassed over a million views for their cover of Justin Bieber's As Long As You Love Me. Their YouTube channel views are currently at over 4 million.
In 2012 At Sunset released their first EP, 'Back in Time'. The EP was released digitally, with physical copies only being sold at concerts.
On 24 February 2014 Jae announced via his YouTube channel that he was leaving the band. Following this news, the band announced local solo act Tom Jay Williams would be joining the band on 26 March 2014. Tom was a contestant on Australian Idol in 2008. He was the youngest ever contestant to be in the top 10 finalists.
Following the addition of new band member, Tom, the band re-released their single 'Back in Time' on 23 April 2014.
At Sunset's latest YouTube cover, 'Replay' amassed over 400,000 views in the first two weeks of uploading and was endorsed by original artist, Zendaya.


== Tours ==
In January 2013, At Sunset toured with Australian pop artist Reece Mastin. Their first headline gig in their hometown of Adelaide attracted an audience of 22,000 people. They have played acoustically on radio stations, including the nationally syndicated Austereo show, The Bump, and on television for children's show Saturday Disney.
At Sunset also headlined the Teen Rush tour from 6–20 April 2013 with bands Titanium and Kristina. This tour saw the band touring to Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne and Sydney.
In May 2012 At Sunset travelled to Singapore to perform at the Music Matters benefit with popular artists such as Boyce Avenue.
In May 2014 At Sunset undertook a promotional tour in the USA, consisting of performances in Los Angeles, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and New York. The band did interviews with Ryan Seacrest, Tiger Beat Magazine, The Rhode Show, KIIS FM, KARE 11 News and KDWB. After returning home for only a couple of weeks the band quickly returned to the USA for more promotional touring.
On 12 April 2015, the band released a new single, "Every Little Thing" to Australian radio.


== Discography ==


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Site
Official Facebook
Official Twitter