This list of birds of Georgia lists every wild bird species ever seen, identified and reliably documented in the American state of Georgia, as accepted by the Georgia Ornithological Society Checklist and Records Committee (GOSRC) as of 2010.
Unless otherwise noted, all species listed below are considered to occur regularly in Georgia as permanent residents, summer or winter visitors, or migrants. The following codes are used to designate some species:
(E) Extinct - a recent bird that no longer exists
(A) Accidental - a bird that occurs rarely or accidentally in Georgia, and for which the GOSRC requests a full report for verification.
Only those birds that are considered by the GOSRC to have arrived in Georgia without human assistance, or introduced species with established, self-sustaining populations in Georgia, are included on this list. Probable escapees are not included. There are 414 species on the Georgia state checklist.
This list is presented in taxonomic order and follows The Check-list of North American Birds (7th edition, 51st supplement, 2010), published by the American Ornithologists' Union. The table of contents is grouped into passerines (the largest order of birds) and non-passerines. The family accounts at the beginning of each heading reflect this taxonomy, as do the species counts found in each family account. Introduced, casual, accidental, extirpated and extinct species are included in the total species counts for North America and Georgia.


== Ducks, geese and swans ==

Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae
The family Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These are birds that are adapted for an aquatic existence with webbed feet, bills that are flattened to a greater or lesser extent, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to special oils. 40 species of Anatidae have been recorded in Georgia.
Black-bellied whistling-duck, Dendrocygna autumnalis
Fulvous whistling-duck, Dendrocygna bicolor (A)
Greater white-fronted goose, Anser albifrons
Snow goose, Chen caerulescens
Ross's goose, Chen rossii (A)
Brant, Branta bernicla (A)
Cackling goose, Branta hutchinsonii (A)
Canada goose, Branta canadensis
Tundra swan, Cygnus columbianus
Wood duck, Aix sponsa

Gadwall, Anas strepera
Eurasian wigeon, Anas penelope (A)
American wigeon, Anas americana
American black duck, Anas rubripes
Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos
Mottled duck, Anas fulvigula
Blue-winged teal, Anas discors
Cinnamon teal, Anas cyanoptera (A)
Northern shoveler, Anas clypeata
Northern pintail, Anas acuta
Green-winged teal, Anas crecca carolinensis
Canvasback, Aythya valisineria

Redhead, Aythya americana
Ring-necked duck, Aythya collaris
Greater scaup, Aythya marila
Lesser scaup, Aythya affinis
King eider, Somateria spectabilis (A)
Common eider, Somateria mollissima (A)
Harlequin duck, Histrionicus histrionicus (A)
Surf scoter, Melanitta perspicillata
White-winged scoter, Melanitta fusca
Black scoter, Melanitta americana
Long-tailed duck, Clangula hyemalis
Bufflehead, Bucephala albeola
Common goldeneye, Bucephala clangula
Hooded merganser, Lophodytes cucullatus
Common merganser, Mergus merganser (A)
Red-breasted merganser, Mergus serrator
Masked duck, Nomonyx dominicus (A)
Ruddy duck, Oxyura jamaicensis


== Chachalacas ==

Order: Galliformes   Family: Cracidae
The chachalacas are tropical fowl native to Mexico, only entering into southern Texas in their native range. They were introduced to Sapelo Island, Georgia in 1923.
Plain chachalaca, Ortalis vetula


== New World quail ==

Order: Galliformes   Family: Odontophoridae
The New World quails are small, plump terrestrial birds only distantly related to the quails of the Old World, but named for their similar appearance and habits. Only one species of New World quail has been recorded in Georgia.
Northern bobwhite, Colinus virginianus


== Partridges, grouse, turkeys and Old World quail ==

Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae
The Phasianidae is the family containing the pheasants and related species. These are terrestrial birds, variable in size but generally plump, with broad, relatively short wings. Many are gamebirds or have been domesticated as a food source for humans. Two species of Phasianidae have been recorded in Georgia.
Ruffed grouse, Bonasa umbellus
Wild turkey, Meleagris gallopavo


== Loons ==

Order: Gaviiformes   Family: Gaviidae
Loons are aquatic birds the size of a large duck, to which they are unrelated. With mostly black plumage and spear-shaped bills, loons swim well and fly adequately but, because their legs are placed towards the rear of the body, are clumsy on land. Four species of loons have occurred in Georgia.
Red-throated loon, Gavia stellata
Pacific loon, Gavia pacifica (A)
Common loon, Gavia immer
Yellow-billed loon, Gavia adamsii (A)


== Grebes ==

Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land. Five species of grebe have been recorded in Georgia.
Pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps
Horned grebe, Podiceps auritus
Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena
Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis
Western grebe, Aechmorphorus occidentalis (A)


== Petrels and shearwaters ==

Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae
The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterized by united tubular nostrils with a median septum. Six species of procellarids have been recorded in Georgia.
Black-capped petrel, Pterodoma hasitata
Cory's shearwater, Calonectris diomedea
Great shearwater, Puffinus gravis
Sooty shearwater, Puffinus griseus (A)
Manx shearwater, Puffinus puffinus (A)
Audubon's shearwater, Puffinus lherminieri


== Storm-petrels ==

Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae
The storm-petrels are the smallest seabirds, relatives of the petrels, feeding on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the ocean's surface, typically while hovering in bat-like flight. Three species of storm-petrels have been recorded in Georgia.
Wilson's storm-petrel, Oceanites oceanicus
Leach's storm-petrel, Oceanodroma leucorhoa (A)
Band-rumped storm-petrel, Oceanodroma castro (A)


== Tropicbirds ==

Order: Phaethontiformes   Family: Phaethontidae
Tropicbirds are slender white birds of tropical oceans, with exceptionally long central tail feathers. Their long wings have black markings, as does the head. Two species of tropicbirds have been recorded in Georgia.
White-tailed tropicbird, Phaethon lepturus (A)
Red-billed tropicbird, Phaeton aethereus (A)


== Storks ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, heavy, long-legged, long-necked wading birds with long stout bills and wide wingspans. They lack the powder down that other wading birds such as herons, spoonbills and ibises use to clean off fish slime. Storks lack a syrinx and are mute. A single species of stork has been recorded in Georgia.
Wood stork, Mycteria americana


== Frigatebirds ==

Order: Suliformes   Family: Fregatidae
Frigatebirds are large seabirds usually found over tropical oceans. They are large, black or black and white, with long wings and deeply forked tails. The males have colored inflatable throat pouches. One species of frigatebird has been recorded in Georgia.
Magnificent frigatebird, Fregata magnificens


== Gannets and boobies ==

Order: Suliformes   Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium-large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish. Three species of sulid have been recorded in Georgia.
Masked booby, Sula dactylatra (A)
Brown booby, Sula leucogaster (A)
Northern gannet, Morus bassanus


== Cormorants ==

Order: Suliformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Cormorants are medium-to-large aquatic birds, usually with mainly dark plumage and areas of colored skin on the face. The bill is long, thin and sharply hooked. Two species of cormorant have been recorded in Georgia.
Double-crested cormorant, Phalacrocorax auritus
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo (A)


== Darters ==

Order: Suliformes   Family: Anhingidae
Darters are cormorant-like water birds with very long necks and long, straight beaks. They are fish eaters which often swim with only their neck above the water. Only a single species of anhingidae has been recorded in Georgia.
Anhinga, Anhinga anhinga


== Pelicans ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae
Pelicans are very large water birds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. Like other birds in the order Pelecaniformes, they have four webbed toes. Both species of pelican that occur in North America have been recorded in Georgia.
American white pelican, Pelecanus erythrorhynchos
Brown pelican, Pelecanus occidentalis


== Bitterns, herons and egrets ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the herons, egrets and bitterns. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more secretive. Twelve species of bitterns, herons and egrets have been recorded in Georgia.
American bittern, Botaurus lentiginosus
Least bittern, Ixobrychus exilis
Great blue heron, Ardea herodias
Great egret, Ardea alba
Snowy egret, Egretta thula
Little blue heron, Egretta caerulea
Tricolored heron, Egretta tricolor
Reddish egret, Egretta rufescens
Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis
Green heron, Butorides virescens
Black-crowned night-heron, Nycticorax nycticorax
Yellow-crowned night-heron, Nyctanassa violacea


== Ibises and spoonbills ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
The family Threskiornithidae includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings; the bill is also long, decurved in the case of the ibises, straight and distinctively flattened in the spoonbills. Three species of ibis and a single species of spoonbill have been recorded in Georgia. There are 4 Georgia species.
American white ibis, Eudocimus albus
Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus
White-faced ibis, Plegadis chihi (A)
Roseate spoonbill, Platalea ajaja


== New World vultures ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Cathartidae
New World vultures are not closely related to Old World vultures, but superficially resemble them because of convergent evolution. Like the Old World vultures, they are scavengers; however, unlike Old World vultures, which find carcasses by sight, New World vultures have a good sense of smell with which they locate carcasses. Two species of New World vulture have been recorded in Georgia.
Black vulture, Coragyps atratus
Turkey vulture, Cathartes aura


== Osprey ==

Order: Falconiformes   Family: Pandionidae
Pandionidae is a family of fish-eating birds of prey, possessing a very large, powerful hooked beak for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight. The family is monotypic; its sole member, the osprey, has been recorded in Georgia.
Osprey, Pandion haliaetus


== Hawks, kites and eagles ==

Order: Falconiformes   Family: Accipitridae
Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey that includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. They have very large, hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight. Twelve species of this family have been recorded in Georgia.
Swallow-tailed kite, Elanoides forficatus
Mississippi kite, Ictinia mississippiensis
Bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus
Northern harrier, Circus cyaneus
Sharp-shinned hawk, Accipiter striatus
Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii
Northern goshawk, Accipiter gentilis (A)
Red-shouldered hawk, Buteo lineatus
Broad-winged hawk, Buteo platypterus
Red-tailed hawk, Buteo jamaicensis
Rough-legged hawk, Buteo lagopus
Golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos


== Caracaras and falcons ==

Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
The Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey containing the falcons and caracaras. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons. Three species of falcon have been recorded in Georgia.
American kestrel, Falco sparverius
Merlin, Falco columbarius
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus


== Rails, gallinules and coots ==

Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae
The Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. The most typical family members occupy dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive, making them difficult to observe. Nine species of rails have been recorded in Georgia.
Yellow rail, Coturnicops noveboracensis (A)
Black rail, Laterallus jamaicensis
Clapper rail, Rallus crepitans
King rail, Rallus elegans
Virginia rail, Rallus limicola
Sora, Porzana carolina
Purple gallinule, Porphyrio martinica
Common gallinule, Gallinula galeata
American coot, Fulica americana


== Limpkin ==

Order: Gruiformes   Family: Aramidae
The limpkin is an odd bird that looks like a large rail, but is skeletally closer to the cranes. It is found in marshes with some trees or scrub in the Caribbean, South America and southern Florida. The family is monotypic, and its sole member has been recorded in Georgia.
Limpkin, Aramus guarauna (A)


== Cranes ==

Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae
Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks extended. Most have elaborate and noisy courtship displays or "dances". Two species of crane have been recorded in Georgia.
Sandhill crane, Grus canadensis
Whooping crane, Grus americana (A)


== Lapwings and plovers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae
The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are generally found in open country, mostly in habitats near water. Seven species of plover have been recorded in Georgia.
Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola
American golden-plover, Pluviali dominicas
Snowy plover, Charadrius nivosus (A)
Wilson's plover, Charadrius wilsonia
Semipalmated plover, Charadrius semipalmatus
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus
Killdeer, Charadrius vociferus


== Oystercatchers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Haematopodidae
The oystercatchers are large, conspicuous and noisy plover-like birds, with strong bills used for smashing or prising open molluscs. A single species of oystercatcher has been recorded in Georgia.
American oystercatcher, Haematopus palliatus


== Stilts and avocets ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills. Two species of this family have been recorded in Georgia.
Black-necked stilt, Himantopus mexicanus
American avocet, Recurvirostra americana


== Sandpipers and allies ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae
Scolopacidae is a large and diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds. Most eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or sand. Different lengths of legs and bills enable multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. 32 species of scolopacidae have been recorded in Georgia.
Spotted sandpiper, Actitis macularius
Solitary sandpiper, Tringa solitaria
Greater yellowlegs, Tringa melanoleuca
Willet, Tringa semipalmata
Lesser yellowlegs, Tringa flavipes
Upland sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda
Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus
Long-billed curlew, Numenius americanus
Hudsonian godwit, Limosa haemastica (A)
Marbled godwit, Limosa fedoa
Ruddy turnstone, Arenaria interpres
Red knot, Calidris canutus
Sanderling, Calidris alba

Semipalmated sandpiper, Calidris pusilla
Western sandpiper, Calidris mauri
Least sandpiper, Calidris minutilla
White-rumped sandpiper, Calidris fuscicollis
Baird's sandpiper, Calidris bairdii
Pectoral sandpiper, Calidris melanotos
Purple sandpiper, Calidris maritima
Dunlin, Calidris alpina
Curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea (A)
Stilt sandpiper, Calidris himantopus
Buff-breasted sandpiper, Tryngites subruficollis
Ruff, Philomachus pugnax (A)
Short-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus griseus
Long-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus scolopaceus
Wilson's snipe, Gallinago delicata
American woodcock, Scolopax minor
Wilson's phalarope, Phalaropus tricolor
Red-necked phalarope, Phalaropus lobatus
Red phalarope, Phalaropus fulicarius


== Gulls, terns and skimmers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae
The Laridae are a family of medium to large seabirds and containing the gulls, terns, kittiwakes and skimmers. They are typically gray or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. 28 species of larids have been recorded in Georgia.
Black-legged kittiwake, Rissa tridactyla
Sabine's gull, Xema sabini (A)
Bonaparte's gull, Chroicocephalus philadelphia
Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus (A)
Little gull, Hydrocoleus minutus (A)
Laughing gull, Leucophaeus atricilla
Franklin's gull, Leucophaeus pipixcan
Ring-billed gull, Larus delawarensis
California gull, Larus californicus (A)
Herring gull, Larus argentatus
Thayer's gull, Larus thayeri (A)
Iceland gull, Larus glaucoides (A)
Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus
Glaucous gull, Larus hyperboreus
Great black-backed gull, Larus marinus
Brown noddy, Anous stolidus (A)

Sooty tern, Onychoprion fuscata
Bridled tern, Onychoprion anaethetus
Least tern, Sternula antillarum
Gull-billed tern, Gelochelidon nilotica
Caspian tern, Hydroprogne caspia
Black tern, Chlidonias niger
Common tern, Sterna hirundo
Arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea (A)
Forster's tern, Sterna forsteri
Royal tern, Thalasseus maxima
Sandwich tern, Thalasseus sandvicensis
Black skimmer, Rynchops niger


== Skuas ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae
Skuas are medium to large seabirds, typically with gray or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They have longish bills with hooked tips and webbed feet with sharp claws. They look like large dark gulls, but have a fleshy cere above the upper mandible. They are strong, acrobatic fliers. Four species of skua have been recorded in Georgia.
South polar skua, Stercorarius maccormicki (A)
Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus
Parasitic jaeger, Stercorarius parasiticus
Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus (A)


== Alcids ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Alcidae
Alcids are superficially similar to penguins due to their black-and-white colors, their upright posture and some of their habits; however they are not closely related to penguins and are (with one extinct exception) able to fly. Auks live on the open sea, only deliberately coming ashore to breed. Two species of auk have been recorded in Georgia.
Dovekie, Alle alle (A)
Razorbill, Alca torda (A)


== Pigeons and doves ==

Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere. Six species of columbidae have been recorded in Georgia.
Rock dove, Columba livia
Eurasian collared-dove, Streptopelia decaocto
White-winged dove, Zenaida asiatica
Mourning dove, Zenaida macroura
Passenger pigeon, Ectopistes migratorius (E)
Common ground-dove, Columbina passerina


== Parrots ==
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittacidae
Parrots are small to large birds with characteristic curved beaks. Their upper mandibles have slight mobility in the joint with the skull and they have a generally erect stance. Although some parts of the United States have a variety of exotic psitticids established, Georgia has only a single native, and now extinct, species recorded.
Carolina parakeet, Conuropsis carolinensis (E)


== Cuckoos, roadrunners and anis ==

Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. Three species of cuckoo have been recorded in Georgia.
Yellow-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus
Black-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus erythropthalmus
Smooth-billed ani, Crotophaga ani (A)


== Barn owls ==

Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae
Barn owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons. A single species of barn owl has been recorded in Georgia.
Barn owl, Tyto alba


== Typical owls ==

Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae
Typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk. Eight species of owl have been recorded in Georgia.
Eastern screech-owl, Megascops asio
Great horned owl, Bubo virginianus
Snowy owl, Bubo scandiacus (A)
Burrowing owl, Athene cunicularia (A)
Barred owl, Strix varia
Long-eared owl, Asio otus (A)
Short-eared owl, Asio flammeus
Northern saw-whet owl, Aegolius acadicus (A)


== Nightjars ==

Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is cryptically colored to resemble bark or leaves. Three species of nightjar have been recorded in Georgia.
Common nighthawk, Chordeiles minor
Chuck-will's-widow, Antrostomus carolinensis
Eastern whip-poor-will, Antrostomus vociferus


== Swifts ==

Order: Apodiformes   Family: Apodidae
The swifts are small birds, spending most of their lives flying. They have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have very long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang. One species of swift has been recorded in Georgia.
Chimney swift, Chaetura pelagica


== Hummingbirds ==

Order: Apodiformes   Family: Trochilidae
Hummingbirds are small birds capable of hovering in mid-air due to the rapid flapping of their wings. They are the only birds that can fly backwards. Eleven species of hummingbird have been recorded in Georgia.
Green-breasted mango, Anthracothorax prevostii (A)
Broad-billed hummingbird, Cynanthus latirostris (A)
Buff-bellied hummingbird, Amazila yucatanensis (A)
Magnificent hummingbird, Eugenes fulgens (A)
Ruby-throated hummingbird, Archilochus colubris
Black-chinned hummingbird, Archilochus alexandri
Anna's hummingbird, Calypte anna (A)
Calliope hummingbird, Selasphorus calliope (A)
Broad-tailed hummingbird, Selasphorus platycercus (A)
Rufous hummingbird, Selasphorus rufus
Allen's hummingbird, Selasphorus sasin (A)


== Kingfishers ==

Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Alcedinidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails. One species of kingfisher has been recorded in Georgia.
Belted kingfisher, Megaceryle alcyon


== Woodpeckers, sapsuckers and flickers ==

Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae
Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks. Nine species of woodpecker have been recorded in Georgia.
Red-headed woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus
Red-bellied woodpecker, Melanerpes carolinus
Yellow-bellied sapsucker, Sphyrapicus varius
Downy woodpecker, Picoides pubescens
Hairy woodpecker, Picoides villosus
Red-cockaded woodpecker, Picoides borealis
Northern flicker, Colaptes auratus
Pileated woodpecker, Dryocopus pileatus
Ivory-billed woodpecker, Campephilus principalis (A)


== Tyrant flycatchers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Tyrannidae
Tyrant flycatchers are passerines which occur throughout North and South America. They superficially resemble the Old World flycatchers, but are more robust and have stronger bills. They do not have the sophisticated vocal capabilities of the songbirds. Most, but not all, are rather plain. As the name implies, most are insectivorous. 16 species of tyrant flycatcher have been recorded in Georgia.
Olive-sided flycatcher, Contopus cooperi
Eastern wood-pewee, Contopus virens
Yellow-bellied flycatcher, Empidonax flaviventris
Acadian flycatcher, Empidonax virescens
Alder flycatcher, Empidonax alnorum (A)
Willow flycatcher, Empidonax traillii
Least flycatcher, Empidonax minimus
Eastern phoebe, Sayornis phoebe
Say's phoebe, Sayornis saya (A)
Vermilion flycatcher, Pyrocephalus rubinus
Ash-throated flycatcher, Myiarchus cinerascens (A)
Great crested flycatcher, Myiarchus crinitus
Western kingbird, Tyrannus verticalis
Eastern kingbird, Tyrannus tyrannus
Gray kingbird, Tyrannus dominicensis
Scissor-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus forficatus


== Shrikes ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerines known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey. One species of shrike has been recorded in Georgia.
Loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus


== Vireos ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vireonidae

The vireos are a group of small to medium-sized passerines restricted to the New World. They are typically greenish in color and resemble wood warblers apart from their heavier bills. Seven species of vireo have been recorded in Georgia.
White-eyed vireo, Vireo griseus
Bell's vireo, Vireo bellii (A)
Yellow-throated vireo, Vireo flavifrons
Blue-headed vireo, Vireo solitarius
Warbling vireo, Vireo gilvus
Philadelphia vireo, Vireo philadelphicus
Red-eyed vireo, Vireo olivaceus


== Jays, crows, magpies and ravens ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae
The Corvidae family includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence. Five species of corvids have been recorded in Georgia.
Blue jay, Cyanocitta cristata
Florida scrub-jay, Aphelocoma coerulescens (A)
American crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos
Fish crow, Corvus ossifragus
Common raven, Corvus corax


== Larks ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds. One species of lark has been recorded in Georgia.
Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris


== Swallows and martins ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae
The Hirundinidae family is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partly joined at the base. Seven species of swallows have been recorded in Georgia.
Purple martin, Progne subis
Tree swallow, Tachycineta bicolor
Northern rough-winged swallow, Stelgidopteryx serripennis
Bank swallow, Riparia riparia
Cliff swallow, Petrochelidon pyrrhonota
Cave swallow, Petrochelidon fulva (A)
Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica


== Chickadees and titmice ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae
The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet including seeds and insects. Two species of parids have been recorded in Georgia.
Carolina chickadee, Poecile carolinensis
Tufted titmouse, Baeolophus bicolor


== Nuthatches ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae
Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike most other birds which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet. Three species of nuthatches have been recorded in Georgia.
Red-breasted nuthatch, Sitta canadensis
White-breasted nuthatch, Sitta carolinensis
Brown-headed nuthatch, Sitta pusilla


== Treecreepers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae
Treecreepers are small woodland birds, brown above and white below. They have thin pointed down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees. A single species of treecreeper has been recorded in Georgia.
Brown creeper, Certhia americana


== Wrens ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae
Wrens are small and inconspicuous birds, except for their loud songs. They have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous. Six species of wren have been recorded in Georgia.
Carolina wren, Thryothorus ludovicianus
Bewick's wren, Thryomanes bewickii (A)
House wren, Troglodytes aedon
Winter wren, Troglodytes hyemalis
Sedge wren, Cistothorus platensis
Marsh wren, Cistothorus palustris


== Gnatcatchers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Polioptilidae
The family Polioptilidae is a group of small insectivorous passerine birds, containing the gnatcatchers and gnatwrens. One species of gnatcatcher has been recorded in Georgia.
Blue-gray gnatcatcher, Polioptila caerulea


== Kinglets ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae
The kinglets are a small family of birds which resemble the titmice. They are very small insectivorous birds in the genus Regulus. The adults have colored crowns, giving rise to their name. Two species of kinglet have been recorded in Georgia.
Golden-crowned kinglet, Regulus satrapa
Ruby-crowned kinglet, Regulus calendula


== Old World flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe (A)


== Thrushes ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly but not exclusively in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs. Nine species of thrushes have been recorded in Georgia.
Eastern bluebird, Sialia sialis
Veery, Catharus fuscescens
Gray-cheeked thrush, Catharus minimus
Bicknell's thrush, Catharus bicknelli (A)
Swainson's thrush, Catharus ustulatus
Hermit thrush, Catharus guttatus
Wood thrush, Hylocichla mustelina
American robin, Turdus migratorius
Varied thrush, Ixoreus naevius (A)


== Mimids ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Mimidae
The Mimids, or mimic thrushes, are a family of passerine birds which includes thrashers, mockingbirds, tremblers and the New World catbirds. They are notable for their vocalization, especially their remarkable ability to mimic a wide variety of birds and other sounds heard outdoors. Four species of mimic thrush have been recorded in Georgia.
Gray catbird, Dumetella carolinensis
Northern mockingbird, Mimus polyglottos
Sage thrasher, Oreoscoptes montanus (A)
Brown thrasher, Toxostoma rufum


== Starlings and mynas ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small to medium-sized passerines with strong feet. Their flight is strong and direct and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is open country, and they eat insects and fruit. Their plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen. A single species of introduced starling is established in Georgia.
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris


== Pipits ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground-feeding insectivores of open country. Two species of pipit have been recorded in Georgia.
American pipit, Anthus rubescens
Sprague's pipit, Anthus spragueii (A)


== Waxwings ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Bombycillidae
The waxwings are a group of passerine birds with soft silky plumage and unique red tips to some of the wing feathers. In the Bohemian and cedar waxwings, these tips look like sealing wax and give the group its name. These are arboreal birds of northern forests. They live on insects in summer and berries in winter. One species of waxwing has been recorded in Georgia.
Cedar waxwing, Bombycilla cedrorum


== Longspurs ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae
The Calcariidae are a group of passerine birds that have been traditionally grouped with the Emberizeridae (New World sparrows), but differ in a number of respects and are usually found in open grassy areas. Three species of longspurs have been recorded in Georgia.
Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus (A)
Smith's longspur, Calcarius pictus (A)
Snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis (A)


== Wood warblers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Parulidae
The wood warblers are a group of small, often colorful, passerines restricted to the New World. Most are arboreal, but some are terrestrial. Most members of this family are insectivores. 42 species of wood-warbler have been recorded in Georgia.
Bachman's warbler, Vermivora bachmannii (E)
Blue-winged warbler, Vermivora cyanoptera
Golden-winged warbler, Vermivora chrysoptera
Tennessee warbler, Oreothlypis peregrina
Orange-crowned warbler, Oreothlypis celata
Nashville warbler, Oreothlypis ruficapilla
Northern parula, Setophaga americana
Yellow warbler, Setophaga petechia
Chestnut-sided warbler, Setophaga pensylvanica
Magnolia warbler, Setophaga magnolia
Cape May warbler, Setophaga tigrina
Black-throated blue warbler, Setophaga caerulescens
Yellow-rumped warbler, Setophaga coronata
Black-throated gray warbler, Setophaga nigrescens (A)
Black-throated green warbler, Setophaga virens
Townsend's warbler, Setophaga townsendi (A)
Blackburnian warbler, Setophaga fusca
Yellow-throated warbler, Setophaga dominica
Pine warbler, Setophaga pinus

Kirtland's warbler, Setophaga kirtlandii (A)
Prairie warbler, Setophaga discolor
Palm warbler, Setophaga palmarum
Bay-breasted warbler, Setophaga castanea
Blackpoll warbler, Setophaga striata
Cerulean warbler, Setophaga cerulea
Hooded warbler, Setophaga citrina
American redstart, Setophaga ruticilla
Black-and-white warbler, Mniotilta varia
Prothonotary warbler, Protonotaria citrea
Worm-eating warbler, Helmitheros vermivorus
Swainson's warbler, Limnothlypis swainsonii
Ovenbird, Seiurus aurocapilla
Northern waterthrush, Parkesia noveboracensis
Louisiana waterthrush, Parkesia motacilla
Connecticut warbler, Oporornis agilis
Kentucky warbler, Geothlypis formosa
Mourning warbler, Geothlypis philadelphia
MacGillivray's warbler, Geothlypis tolmiei (A)
Common yellowthroat, Geothlypis trichas
Wilson's warbler, Cardellina pusilla
Canada warbler, Cardellina canadensis
Yellow-breasted chat, Icteria virens


== American sparrows, towhees and juncos ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae
The Emberizidae is a large passerine family. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. In Europe, most species are called buntings. In North America, most of the species in this family are called sparrows, although they are not closely related to the Old World sparrows in the family Passeridae. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns. 26 species of emberizids have been recorded in Georgia.
Green-tailed towhee, Pipilo chlorurus (A)
Spotted towhee, Pipilo maculatus (A)
Eastern towhee, Pipilo erythrophthalmus
Bachman's sparrow, Peucaea aestivalis
American tree sparrow, Spizelloides arborea (A)
Chipping sparrow, Spizella passerina
Clay-colored sparrow, Spizella pallida
Field sparrow, Spizella pusilla
Vesper sparrow, Pooecetes gramineus
Lark sparrow, Chondestes grammacus
Lark bunting, Calamospiza melanocorys (A)
Savannah sparrow, Passerculus sandwichensis
Grasshopper sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum

Henslow's sparrow, Ammodramus henslowii
Le Conte's sparrow, Ammodramus leconteii
Nelson's sparrow, Ammodramus nelsoni
Saltmarsh sparrow, Ammodramus caudactus
Seaside sparrow, Ammodramus maritimus
Fox sparrow, Passerella iliaca
Song sparrow, Melospiza melodia
Lincoln's sparrow, Melospiza lincolnii
Swamp sparrow, Melospiza georgiana
White-throated sparrow, Zonotrichia albicollis
Harris's sparrow, Zonotrichia querula (A)
White-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia leucophrys
Dark-eyed junco, Junco hyemalis


== Cardinals, saltators and grosbeaks ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cardinalidae
The cardinals are a family of robust, seed-eating birds with strong bills. They are typically associated with open woodland. The sexes usually have distinct plumages. Ten species of cardinalidae have been recorded in Georgia.
Summer tanager, Piranga rubra
Scarlet tanager, Piranga olivacea
Western tanager, Piranga ludoviciana (A)
Northern cardinal, Cardinalis cardinalis
Rose-breasted grosbeak, Pheucticus ludovicianus
Black-headed grosbeak, Pheucticus melanocephalus (A)
Blue grosbeak, Passerina caerulea
Indigo bunting, Passerina cyanea
Painted bunting, Passerina ciris
Dickcissel, Spiza americana


== Icterids ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Icteridae
The icterids are a group of small to medium-sized, often colorful, passerines restricted to the New World, including the grackles, New World blackbirds and New World orioles. Most have black as a predominant plumage color, often enlivened by yellow, orange or red. 15 species of icterids have been recorded in Georgia.
Bobolink, Dolichonyx oryzivorus
Red-winged blackbird, Agelaius phoeniceus
Eastern meadowlark, Sturnella magna
Western meadowlark, Sturnella neglecta (A)
Yellow-headed blackbird, Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus
Rusty blackbird, Euphagus carolinus
Brewer's blackbird, Euphagus cyanocephalus
Common grackle, Quiscalus quiscula
Boat-tailed grackle, Quiscalus major
Shiny cowbird, Molothrus bonariensis (A)
Brown-headed cowbird, Molothrus ater
Orchard oriole, Icterus spurius
Bullock's oriole, Icterus bullockii (A)
Baltimore oriole, Icterus galbula
Scott's oriole, Icterus parisorum (A)


== Fringilline finches, cardueline finches and allies ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae
Finches are seed-eating passerines. They are small to moderately large and have strong, usually conical and sometimes very large, beaks. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. They have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well. Seven species of finches have been recorded in Georgia.
Purple finch, Haemorhous purpureus
House finch, Haemorhous mexicanus
Red crossbill, Loxia curvirostra
Common redpoll, Acanthis flammea (A)
Pine siskin, Spinus pinus
American goldfinch, Spinus tristis
Evening grosbeak, Coccothraustes vespertinus


== Old World sparrows ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae
Old World sparrows, also known sometimes as weaver finches, are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small plump brownish or grayish birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects. A single species of Old World sparrow is established in Georgia.
House sparrow, Passer domesticus


== Hypothetical species ==

The following species have been reviewed by the GOSRC and, while confirmed in identification, have been reported four or fewer times as sight-only records, without specimen, photographic or video record.
Northern fulmar, Fulmarus glacialis (A)
Swainson's hawk, Buteo swainsoni (A)
Mountain plover, Charadrius montanus (A)
White-winged tern, Chlidonias leucopterus (A)
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii (A)
Green violetear, Colibri thalassinus (A)
Virginia's warbler, Oreothlypis virginiae (A)
Painted redstart, Myioborus pictus (A)


== See also ==
List of North American birds


== References ==
Citations

Bibliography