A block of the periodic table of elements is a set of adjacent groups. The term appears to have been first used by Charles Janet. The respective highest-energy electrons in each element in a block belong to the same atomic orbital type. Each block is named after its characteristic orbital; thus, the blocks are:
s-block
p-block
d-block
f-block
g-block (hypothetical)
The block names (s, p, d, f and g) are derived from the spectroscopic notation for the associated atomic orbitals: sharp, principal, diffuse and fundamental, and then g which follows f in the alphabet.
The following is the order for filling the "subshell" orbitals, according to the Aufbau principle, which also gives the linear order of the "blocks" (as atomic number increases) in the periodic table:
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 6s, 4f, 5d, 6p, 7s, 5f, 6d, 7p, ...
For discussion of the nature of why the energies of the blocks naturally appear in this order in complex atoms, see atomic orbital and electron configuration.
The "periodic" nature of the filling of orbitals, as well as emergence of the s, p, d and f "blocks" is more obvious, if this order of filling is given in matrix form, with increasing principal quantum numbers starting the new rows ("periods") in the matrix. Then, each subshell (composed of the first two quantum numbers) is repeated as many times as required for each pair of electrons it may contain. The result is a compressed periodic table, with each entry representing two successive elements:


== Periodic tableEdit ==
There is an approximate correspondence between this nomenclature of blocks, based on electronic configuration, and groupings of elements based on chemical properties. The s-block and p-block together are usually considered as the main group elements, the d-block corresponds to the transition metals, and the f-block are the lanthanides and the actinides. However, not everyone agrees on the exact membership of each set of elements, so that for example the Group 12 elements Zn, Cd and Hg are considered as main group by some scientists and transition metals by others. Groups (columns) in the f-block (between groups 2 and 3) are not numbered.
In periodic tables organized by blocks, helium is placed next to hydrogen, instead of on top of neon as in tables organized by chemical properties. This is because helium is in the s-block, with its outer (and only) electrons in the 1s atomic orbital. In addition to the blocks listed in this table, there is a hypothetical g-block which is not pictured here. The g-block elements can be seen in the expanded extended periodic table. Also, lutetium and lawrencium are placed under scandium and yttrium to reflect their status as d-block elements (although it has been argued that lanthanum and actinium should instead hold these positions, as they have no electrons in the 4f and 5f orbitals, respectively, while lutetium and lawrencium do).


== ReferencesEdit ==
^ Charles Janet, La classification hélicoïdale des éléments chimiques, Beauvais, 1928
^ Scerri, Eric. "Mendeleev's table finally completed and what to do about group 3". 
^ Lavelle, Laurence. "Lanthanum (La) and Actinium (Ac) Should Remain in the d-Block" (PDF). lavelle.chem.ucla.edu. Retrieved 9 November 2014. 
'What Are P-Block Elements?'
The p-block is on the right side of the periodic table and includes elements from the six columns beginning with column 3A and ending with column 8A (or columns 13-18 on some versions of the periodic table). Helium, which is in the top of column 8A, is not included in the p-block. In the periodic table shown here, the p-block is colored orange.
'periodic table by orbital'
P-block elements are unified by the fact that their valence electrons (outermost electrons) are in the p orbital. The p orbital consists of six lobed shapes coming off a central point at evenly spaced angles. The p orbital can hold a maximum of six electrons, hence why there are six columns in the p-block. Elements in column 3A, the first column of the p-block, have one valence electron. Elements in column 4A, the second column of the p-block, have two valence electrons. The trend continues this way until we reach column 8A, which has six valence electrons.
There are 35 elements that live in the p-block, which can be seen here.
'p-block elements on PT'
The p-block is home to the biggest variety of elements and is the only block that contains all three types of elements: metals, nonmetals, and metalloids. Generally, the p-block elements are best described in terms of element type or column number.
'Properties of P-Block Metals'
P-block metals have classic metal characteristics: they are shiny, they are good conductors of heat and electricity, and they lose electrons easily. Generally, these metals have high melting points and readily react with nonmetals to form ionic compounds. Ionic compounds form when a positive metal ion bonds with a negative nonmetal ion.
Of the p-block metals, several have fascinating properties. Gallium, in the 3rd row of column 3A, is a metal that can melt in the palm of your hand. Tin, in the fourth row of column 4A, is an abundant, flexible, and extremely useful metal. It is an important component of many metal alloys like bronze, solder, and pewter.
Sitting right beneath tin is lead, a toxic metal with an intriguing history. Ancient peoples used lead for a variety of things, from food sweeteners to pottery glazes to eating utensils. Unbeknownst to these ancient civilizations, lead is quite toxic. Many historians suspect that lead poisoning is related to the fall of Roman civilization. For a long time, lead was used in the manufacturing of paints. It was only within the last century that lead paint use has been restricted due to its toxic nature.
'Properties of P-Block Metalloids
Metalloids have properties of both metals and nonmetals, but the term 'metalloid' lacks a strict definition. All of the elements that are commonly recognized as metalloids are in the p-block: boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic, antinomy, and tellurium.
Silicon is perhaps the most famous metalloid. It is the second most abundant element in Earth's crust and one of the main ingredients in glass. It is used to make microchips for computers and other electronic devices. So valuable is silicon to the technology industry that Silicon Valley in California is named after it.
Germanium has properties very similar to silicon, yet this element is much more rare. Arsenic is a toxic metalloid that has been used throughout history as an additive to metal alloys, paints, and even makeup.
The Noble Gases'
Inert gases on the periodic table We love the noble gases. Some scientists used to call them the inert gases. It didn't really work because there are a few other gases that are basically inert but not noble gases. Nitrogen (N2) might be considered an inert gas, but it is not a noble gas. The noble gases are another family of elements, and all of them are located in the far right column of the periodic table. For all of you budding chemists, the far right is also known as Group Zero (Group 0) or Group Eighteen (Group XVIII). This family has the happiest elements of all.
Why Are They Happy?'
Using the Bohr description of electron shells, happy atoms have full shells. All of the noble gases have full outer shells with eight electrons. Oh, wait! That's not totally correct. At the top of the noble gases is little helium (He), with a shell that is full with only two electrons. The fact that their outer shells are full means they are quite happy and don't need to react with other elements. In fact, they rarely combine with other elements. That non-reactivity is why they are called inert.
'Who's in the Family?'
Neon is one of many inert gases used around you All of the elements in Group Zero are noble gases. The list includes helium, neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and radon (Rn). Don't think that, because these elements don't like to react, we don't use them. You will find noble gases all over our world. Neon is used in advertising signs. Argon is used in light bulbs. Helium is used in balloons and to cool things. Xenon is used in headlights for new cars. Because of their chemical properties, these gases are also used in the laboratory to help stabilize reactions that would usually proceed too quickly. When you move down the periodic table, as the atomic numbers increase, the elements become rarer. They are not just rare in nature, but rare as useful elements, too.
Halogens on the Right
Halogens on the Periodic Table In the second column from the right side of the periodic table, you will find Group Seventeen (Group XVII). This column is the home of the halogen family of elements. Who is in this family? The elements included are fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), iodine (I), and astatine (At).
What Makes Them Similar?
When you look at our descriptions of the elements fluorine and chlorine, you will see that they both have seven electrons in their outer shell. That seven-electron trait applies to all of the halogens. They are all just one electron shy of having full shells. Because they are so close to being happy, they have the trait of combining with many different elements. They are very reactive. You will often find them bonding with metals and elements from Group One of the periodic table. The elements in the column on the left each have one electron that they like to donate.
Sodium Chloride is a Halogen We've just told you how reactive the halogens are. Not all halogens react with the same intensity or enthusiasm. Fluorine is the most reactive and combines with most elements from around the periodic table. Reactivity decreases as you move down the column. As you learn more about the table, you will find this pattern true for other families. As the atomic number increases, the atoms get bigger. Their chemical properties change just a little bit when compared to the element right above them on the table.
What is a Halide?
The elements we are talking about in this section are called halogens. When a halogen combines with another element, the resulting compound is called a halide. One of the best examples of a halide is sodium chloride (NaCl). Don't think that the halogens always make ionic compounds and salts. Some halides of the world are a part of molecules with covalent bonds.