Bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Germany have been traditionally strong due to commercial, cultural and technological co-operation.


== History ==

India and Germany had indirect contact during ancient times, resulting more visibly in Nazi Germany's use of the swastika in its flag.
During World War I, India was under British rule. Consequently, the British Indian Army was ordered to contribute soldiers to the Allied war effort, including on the Western Front. Over 9000 soldiers died in World War I. Pro-independence activists within the colonial armies sought German assistance for the cause of India's freedom resulting in the Hindu German conspiracy during World War I.
During World War II, the Allied war effort mobilized 2.5 million volunteer troops from British India. Subhas Chandra Bose, a prominent freedom fighter for Indian independence, made a determined effort to obtain India's independence from Britain by seeking military assistance from the Axis powers. The Indische Legion was formed to serve as a liberation force for British-ruled India and was principally made up of British Indian prisoners of war and expatriates in Europe.

The newly formed Republic of India was one of first nations to end the State of War with Germany after World War II and did not claim war reparations from Germany although 24,000 soldiers serving in the British Indian Army died in the campaign to fight Nazi Germany.
India maintained diplomatic relations with both West Germany and East Germany and supported their reunification in 1990.
Germany condemned India for liberating Goa from Portuguese rule in 1961 and supported Portugal's dictatorial regime under Salazar against India. Germany was critical of India for intervening in the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War. Germany rejected India's 1998 nuclear tests with Chancellor Helmut Kohl saying: "this was the wrong decision for them to take; we do not accept that decision."


== Bilateral relations ==


=== Official visits by German Presidents & Chancellors ===
In 2008, German Chancellor Angela Merkel made an official visit to India that led to the signing of several agreements expanding bilateral co-operation in commerce, science, technology and defence.
In 2013, German Chancellor Angela Merkel led a German delegation which included German Federal Ministers of Transport, Building & Urban Development, Interior, Defence, Education & Research, Parliamentary State Secretary for Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear safety; to the Second India-Germany Intergovernmental Consultations in New Delhi.
On 4 October 2015, German Chancellor Angela Merkel travelled to India for the Third Indo-German Inter-Governmental Consultations  accompanied by several members of her government (Minister for Foreign Affairs Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Science & Technology Minister Johanna Wanka, Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development Gerd Muller, Food and Agriculture Minister Christian Schmidt) and a contingent of business leaders. Merkel and her German delegation travelled on a German military cargo plane (a Luftwaffe Airbus A310 military transport aircraft called Kurt Schumacher) because the official government aircraft of the German Chancellor (Konrad Adenauer, a Luftwaffe Airbus A340-313 VIP) became unflightworthy after developing technical problems.
The visit occurred at a time of negative public perception of Germany, brand "Made in Germany" and German corporate ethics - all of whom became tarnished by the rapid succession of highly visible public diplomacy disasters: abrasive rhetoric from Eurogroup creditors adjoined with revelations of ill-temper from German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble (often lampooned as the archetypical "ugly German") during negotiations on austerity measures for EU member-states affected by the sovereign debt crisis; Angela Merkel's unilateral announcements during the European refugee crisis; and industrial fraud revealed through the Volkswagen diesel emissions test violations scandal. German discourse during the Greek sovereign debt default crisis and mass exodus inflow crisis caused alarm in Europe and raised concerns of 'fair-play' by a dominant Germany whose unilateral announcements and policies appeared to discard consensual decision-taking and collective expectations. In October 2015, several public opinion polls conducted in Germany show sinking support for Angela Merkel.
On 5 October 2015, Angela Merkel visited Mahatma Gandhi's memorial at Raj Ghat and was accorded a ceremonial welcome at the Presidential Palace prior to the Third Indo-German Inter-Governmental Consultations  which led to the signing of 18 Memorandums of Understanding (MoU). Germany returned a 10th-century relic, a statue of the Hindu goddess Durga in her Mahishasuramardini avatar, which had been stolen from India.
On 6 October 2015, Prime Minister Narendra Modi held trade discussions on Indo-German science, technology & education cooperation with Angela Merkel in Bengaluru, India's aerospace and ICT hub, besides exploring opportunities to improve bilateral trade. Merkel and Modi toured the vocational training facilities and innovation centre of Robert Bosch - an OEM automotive parts supplier whose software is at the centre of the Volkswagen diesel emissions test violations scandal. Angela Merkel's 3-day official visit to India concluded after the two leaders attended a business & technology forum hosted by NASSCOM and Fraunhofer Institute  where Merkel said: "India needs jobs, Germany needs people and collaboration is crucial to meet the demographic needs of both countries," and opined that the advantages for German companies in India are its huge market, a great growth potential and an impressive capacity for innovation.
Foremost newspapers in both Germany and India - faithfully reflecting the principle societal interests within their respective countries - focussed primarily on the trade and investment aspects of the visit. Germany's State broadcaster Deutsche Welle eloquently captured the prevailing mood regarding the visit with it's editorial titled:"A first step in the right direction – no more, no less". Indian Express in an editorial titled "She came and went" pondered over the modest nature of agreements announced during the visit and placed the onus on India to raise its attractiveness as a partner through concrete socio-economic progress and improvements in bilateral relations in India's immediate neighbourhood. The Hindu termed the visit as a dosis realitaet reality-check for Merkel and Modi.


== Strategic ties ==
The India-Germany strategic relationship is limited by the insignificance of German geopolitical influence in Asian affairs. Contrary to France and UK, Germany has no strategic footprint in Asia.
Anti-Indian public sentiment in Germany is an obstacle to the improvement of strategic ties between Germany and India.


=== Policy determinants in Indo-German relations ===

The outlook of opportunities and challenges facing Germany and India have changed significantly over the last decade amidst the ongoing global geopolitical reordering.
The challenge for the Government of India is to sustain growth of the Indian economy ($2,066tn with 7.4% GDP growth in 2014, against a minimum requirement of 6.5% to balance the Indian Budget 2015-16) in order to meet domestic socio-economic expectations and deliver on electoral promises made by India's ruling NDA coalition government. In September 2015, an opinion survey conducted by Pew Research Center revealed that support for Narendra Modi in India stood at 87%.
Socio-economic difficulties in Europe due to high levels of youth unemployment and de-industrialisation have wide-ranging implications for peace and stability in Germany. German government's ability to implement fiscal and social policies to reinvigorate the German economy ($3,852tn with 1.5% GDP growth in 2014) have narrowed due to the persistence of weak economic growth in the EuroZone and shrinking global demand for German products. German companies are looking to develop new market opportunities and require cheap qualified labour to ensure that German goods and services remain competitive in export markets. Germany's aggressive assertion of influence within the Europe Union has set-off alarm-bells all over Europe prompted an outright rejection of German diktat in Southern and Eastern European countries, given rise to an ominous unease about a dominant Germany in UK and France, and revived memories of Germany's Nazi-era legacy which remain unforgotten. Germany's Der Speigel magazine (in its issue titled "The German Übermacht" dated March 21, 2015) drew attention to the fast spreading resentment of Germany all over Europe. In October 2015, opinion polls in Germany placed Angela Merkel's approval rating at 54%.
Europe-wide acceptance of Germany's leadership role of the European Union hangs in the balance after widespread dismay at the rigid stance on austerity adopted by the German government and perceptions that the harsh conditions which Germany sought to impose upon Greece during the Greek sovereign debt crisis were selfish and overbearingly punitive. Prominent academics objected to the practicality of the German-backed austerity package proposed for Greece, while political observers drew attention to collective amnesia in Germany regarding the reconstruction of Germany through the Marshall Plan and massive debt forgiveness accorded to Germany by Allied countries. Patrick Minford, professor of economics at Cardiff University pointedly observed the destructive nature of German economic policies which result in massive trade surpluses for Germany while pauperising weaker EuroZone countries: "unhealthy for Germany to run very large trade surpluses. They’re sabotaging the rest of Europe." Jacob Soll, professor of history and accounting at the University of Southern California, summarized the biased anti-Greek sentiment amongst academics in Germany: "Germans were honest dupes and the Greeks corrupt, unreliable and incompetent." Hectoring by Germany on the question of debt repayment by Greece drew criticism from French economist Thomas Piketty: “When I hear the Germans say that they maintain a very moral stance about debt and strongly believe that debts must be repaid, then I think: What a huge joke!” (...) “Germany is the country that has never repaid its debts. It has no standing to lecture other nations.”
Forceful portrayal of Germany as the normative model for honesty, efficiency and ethics (relayed incessantly by German officials, mass media and private citizens) came undone following revelations of fraud at a global level on an industrial scale by Volkswagen. Time Magazine termed the actions of Volkswagen as "superbly engineered deception, with 11 million VW diesel cars fitted with special software that enabled them to cheat on emissions tests.(...) German industry was supposed to be above this sort of thing–or at least too smart to get caught." In recent years, several prominent German politicians have been forced to resign after revelations of plagiarism in their PhD thesis: former defence minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, former education minister Annette Schavan as well as Silvana Koch-Mehrin and Jorgo Chatzimarkakis who were both Ministers of the European Parliament from Germany. Currently, German Defence Minister Ursula von der Leyen is facing enquiry into allegations of doctoral thesis plagiarism.
In March 2015, a Europe-wide study into sexual abuse - conducted by the Vienna-based Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA) with sponsorship from the European Commission - showed Germany above the EU average with 35% having suffered sexual abuse. According to the report, one in three women in the Europe Union has been a victim of sexual abuse. Another survey conducted in Germany by the German government's Anti-Discrimination Agency shows that "more than half of all female employees have experienced or witnessed sexual harassment in the workplace. One in five women have been touched against their will by a colleague."
Discrimination against minority groups and persons of color is present in Germany. Germany has a history of xenophobia which continues to persist to the present day.
In October 2015, the Council of Europe voiced concern about mounting violence against minorities in Germany. There have been several xenophobic and racist attacks on persons of color in Germany, including Indians. Compared to 2014, xenophobic attacks and criminal offences committed against refugee shelters in Germany has more than doubled in 2015 to 437 while attacks on homes of migrants almost tripled in 2015 to close to 500.
German public opinion is sharply divided on the 2015 European migrant crisis and confused by contradictory policies announced by Angela Merkel. Alongside those who hailed Angela Merkel's decision to allow refugees into Germany as founded on morality, dissenting voices pointed to the German Chancellor's history of unemotional decision-making and reputation of lacking empathy and observed that Angela Merkel's exceptional largesse was a calculated response to Germany's demographic crisis. On 1 October 2015, opinion polls in Germany showed that support for Chancellor Angela Merkel was dropping rapidly, had sunk to a 4-year low and that "48 percent of Germans were dissatisfied with the government's handling of the migration crisis, as against 41 percent who support Merkel's response". German government needs immigrants in order to rebalance Germany's lopsided demographics. At present, Germany's population is not only shrinking but now predominantly consists of ageing baby boomers.
Germany's geo-economic power has eroded over the past decade as increasing number of countries have bridged technology gaps (Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore), improved productivity (Malaysia, Philippines, Brazil, Turkey, Mexico) and have brought to bear their demographic advantage (China, India, Indonesia) in domestic and export markets. Over the past decade, Indo-German trade grew in volume but dropped in importance. According to Indian Ministry of Commerce MX data: Total trade between India and Germany was $5.5billion (3.8% share of Indian trade and ranked 6) in 2004 and $21.6billion (2.6% share of Indian trade and ranked 9) in 2013. Indian exports to Germany were $2.54billion (3.99% ranked 6) in 2004 and $7.3billion (2.41% ranked 10) in 2013. Indian imports from Germany were $2.92billion (3.73% ranked 6) in 2004 and $14.33billion (2.92% ranked 10) in 2013. 
The reputation of brand "Made in Germany" faces an uncertain future in export markets in the wake of scandals involving German corporations  and the deliberate plane crash of Germanwings Flight 9525.
Fundamental differences regarding the future of the European Union has resulted in political power-play between France, Germany & UK becoming the new normal. German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble opined: "There is no German dominance. Germany is in a good position economically, that is undeniable. But in contrast to France and Great Britain, Germany is not a member of the United Nations Security Council. For that reason alone, you cannot talk about being in a position of political supremacy. Still, the balance in Europe has shifted since the fall of the Iron Curtain." European citizens are increasingly critical of Germany's propensity to arm-twist weaker nations and impose it's vision for Europe. German stranglehold on political decision-making by European Union institutions has become a liability as levels of distrust of Brussels have risen to record levels among European citizens. Traditional political consensus regarding the European Union faces uncertain electoral destinies in both France (2017 presidential elections) and UK (EU referendum) with each outcome bearing the potential for catastrophic socio-economic dislocation. 
India and Germany seek a permanent seat with veto powers at the United Nations Security Council and have joined with Japan and Brazil to coordinate their efforts via the G4 collective. At the UN General Assembly summit in New York in September 2015, the P5 members of the UNSC dismissed any notion of dilution of their power at the UN's high-table and severely undermined efforts by G4 nations to gain access to the exclusive club. While India maintains that it will continue to demand a permanent seat within a reformed UNSC with powers identical to the P5 nations, it has signalled that strengthening of bilateral economic and political ties with neighbouring countries is the immediate priority. Prevailing consensus within the United Nations that Europe is already over-represented within the UN Security Council, juxtaposed with long-established opposition from within Europe to the German candidature, constitute indomitable obstacles which confront Germany.
A reality-check of geopolitical power of G4 nations at the 2015 UN General Assembly and Asian geopolitical compulsions have influenced India's choice to refocus on strategic bilateral engagements with France and UK who are UNSC P5 member States. German influence on the global stage is subject to accommodation by France and UK who are key global security actors. Restrictions imposed through the 1990 Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany effectively subordinates Germany to the Four Powers (USA, UK, France & Russia). The inevitability of a security reordering in Eurasia, impending transformation of the political landscape within the European Union due to the unchecked rise of Euroscepticism, fast deteriorating security situation on the Eastern and Southern periphery of the European Union, assertive manoeuvring by Russia & China in their traditional areas of influence, eventuality of alliances to counterbalance and prevent German dominance of Western Europe, and the improbability of Germany acceding to the UNSC have already been factored in by Indian strategic planners.
Interviewed by The Hindu in the context of the 25th anniversary of German reunification, Mathias Rust the iconic German aviator who contributed to the downfall of the Soviet Union by landing a small aircraft near the Red Square in Moscow on 28 May 1987, surmised that institutional failures in Western countries to preserve moral standards and uphold the primacy of democratic ideals was creating mistrust between peoples and governments. Pointing to the genesis of a New Cold War between Russia and the Western powers, Mathias Rust suggested that India should tread with caution and avoid entanglement: “India will be better served if it follows a policy of neutrality while interacting with EU member countries as the big European powers at present are following the foreign policy of the U.S. unquestioningly,”. Mathias Rust drew attention to the casus belli which is fuelling Euroscepticism: “Governments have been dominated by the corporate entities and citizens have ceased to matter in public policy,”.
On 7 October 2015, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President François Hollande made a rare joint address at the European Parliament to recognise the seriousness of the ongoing socio-political turmoil within Europe and warned that the European Union was on the verge of breakdown. Francois Hollande cautioned European member-states to show solidarity in jointly solving common problems both within Europe and in its immediate neighbourhood, failing which “end of Europe” and “total war” could become inevitable. Angela Merkel urged European lawmakers not to “succumb to the temptation of falling back into acting in nationalistic terms”. Francois Hollande laid out the stark choice that faced British voters through the Brexit referendum: "There is no other way. It's a horrible path, but it's a logical path. Leave Europe, leave Schengen and leave democracy.(...) Do you really want to participate in a common state? That's the question." It had been 26 years since the leaders of France and Germany jointly addressed the European Parliament: Francois Mitterrand and Helmut Kohl made a joint appeal for solidarity just weeks after the fall of the Berlin Wall.


== Defence & Security ==

India and Germany maintain an ongoing dialogue in the areas of commercial maritime security and cooperate in the field of anti-terrorism. The Indian Navy and the German Navy conducted joint-exercises in 2008 for the first time, following an anti-piracy co-operation agreement between the two nations signed in 2006.
Germany's military is principally structured to defend Eastern Europe and to supporting NATO operations in the Western Europe theatre of operations. Unlike UK and France, Germany not only does not have any sovereign territories in the Indo-Pacific region but is also incapable of power projection. Manpower limitations and armament restrictions imposed upon Germany through the 1990 Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany prevent it from developing expeditionary forces and blue-water assets.
The inability of Germany to independently sustain long-distance high-intensity military operations and hostile public sentiment in Germany towards overseas combat operations are obstacles to a meaningful strategic defence and security relationship.


== Cultural & Education cooperation ==
Germany has supported education and cultural programmes in India.
Germany helped establish the Indian Institute of Technology Madras after both governments signed an agreement in 1956 and increased its co-operation and supply of technology and resources over the decades to help expand the institution. India has launched seven micro-satellites into Polar orbits for German universities since 1999.
In the late 1960s, German aircraft designer Kurt Tank, who worked for Focke-Wulf during World War II, went to work in India. First was first employed as the Director of the Madras Institute of Technology, and later joined Hindustan Aeronautics, where he designed the Hindustan Marut fighter-bomber, the first military aircraft constructed in India. Kurt Tank left Hindustan Aeronautics in 1967 and by the 1970s had returned to live in Berlin.
Both nations established the Indo-German Science and Technology Centre in New Delhi to promote joint research and development in energy, environment, coal and water technologies.
India and Germany have signed a MoU regarding the teaching of German-language in Kendriya Vidyalaya public schools in India and the reciprocal introduction of Sanskrit and modern Indian language in government schools in Germany.


== Trade & Investment ==

Stiff competition between foreign manufactured goods within the Indian market has seen machine-tools, automotive parts and medical supplies from German Mittelstand ceding ground to high-technology imports manufactured by companies located in ASEAN & BRICS countries. The Made in Germany label does not favour all goods.
For the 2012-2013 (April–July) period, India's top 10 trading partners according to data published by the Indian Ministry of Commerce:
According to German Statistisches Bundesamt Indo-German trade data for 2014 : total trade with India was €15.98billion (ranked 25) with €1.86billion trade balance in Germany's favour. German exports to India was €8.92billion (ranked 25), German imports from India was €7.06billion (ranked 27).
Germany is India's largest trading partner in Europe. Germany is the 8th largest foreign direct investor (FDI) in India. Germany's FDI totaled about 5.2 billion USD during the period 2000-2012, constituting about 3% of total FDI to India. Indian investments in Germany have seen sharp increase in last few years. (Note: As a measure of comparison, Remittances to India by the Indian diaspora world-wide was US$70 billion in 2013-14).
Indian Prime-Minister Narendra Modi jointly opened the Hannover trade fair Hannover Messe 2015 on 12 April 2015 along with Angela Merkel  and held trade & investment discussions with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin.
In September 2015, Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI) was instructed by the Indian government to investigate if vehicles from Volkswagen had circumvented Indian laws and regulations on vehicle emission testing. Ambuj Sharma, additional secretary at the Ministry of Heavy Industry, said: "ARAI has been asked to submit its report within a week."
The Volkswagen pollution control scandal drew the spotlight to corrupt behaviour in German boardrooms and brought back memories of the HDW bribery scandal surrounding the procurement of Shishumar-class submarines by the Indian Navy.
German immigration rules force accompanying spouses of overseas Indian workers who do not hold an EU blue card to pass a German language proficiency test as a condition to receiving residency permits and visas. The German language proficiency test requirement does not apply to European Union citizens and those from Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, South Korea and the USA.


== Perceptions ==


=== Academic ===

- Jakob De Roover, University of Ghent, Belgium

- Benjamin Zachariah, University of Heidelberg, Germany


=== General public ===

India suffers from a severe image deficit in Germany.
In August 2007, a mob of over 50 persons attacked 8 Indians in Mügeln.
In March 2015, Professor Annette Beck-Sickinger, the head of the biochemistry department at Leipzig University, caused furor in India by rejecting an internship application from an Indian student as a retaliation against India's 'culture of rape' and alluding to the existence of a wider Europe-wide boycott of Indian male students. The racial profiling, gender discrimination and xenophobic undertones of the incident placed the spotlight on prevalent institutional bias, increasing intolerance to foreigners and level of respect for the human rights of persons of color in Germany. Indians have been deeply critical of the German institutional approach to the 2015 Leipzig University intern-ship affair and the absence of sanctions against professor Annette Beck-Sickinger. The Leipzig University internship controversy, occurred just weeks before the April 2015 official visit to Germany by Indian Prime-Minister Narendra Modi at the invitation of German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
The tendency of Western social academics to over emphasise the importance of the caste system for all matters pertaining to India has made Europeans prone to explaining away India via the caste system.
The morbid fascination of European tourists with Hindu cremation rituals is perceived as lack of sensitivity besides being a gross invasion of privacy. Hoards of tourists flock to cremation grounds on the banks of the Ganges, especially in Varanasi (Bénarès), to photograph funeral pyres.


=== BBC World Service Country Rating Poll data for Germany & India ===

According to a 2014 BBC World Service Poll, 32% of Indians view Germany's influence positively, 42% neutral and 26% expressing a negative view, while only 16% of Germans view India's influence positively, 16% neutral and 68% expressing a negative view.


== See also ==
India-European Union relations
Hindu–German Conspiracy
Indians in Germany
Germans in India


== References ==