A bidet shower (bidet spray, bidet sprayer, or health faucet, sometimes colloquially called a "bum gun") is a hand-held triggered nozzle, similar to that on a kitchen sink sprayer, that delivers a spray of water to assist in anal cleansing and cleaning the genitals after defecation and urination.


== DescriptionEdit ==
The health faucet is a source of water for people who prefer using water rather than other methods of anal cleansing. The bidet shower is a relatively modern replacement for the traditional sources of water for this action, such as the bidet, copper pot or bucket and mug, being more hygienic and compact. There is no contact between the spray of water and the used water drainage.


== UsageEdit ==
The user typically grasps the faucet in the right hand and uses the thumb or forefinger (depending on the trigger location) to aim a spray of water at the anus or genitals, sometimes using the left hand (never the right hand in many cultures) or toilet paper to assist cleansing. Use of the left hand only for cleansing, and considering it unclean in many circumstances in everyday life, is a significant custom among Arabs, in the Muslim world in general, and in the Indian subcontinent, where water is commonly used.


== PrevalenceEdit ==
The bidet shower is very common in parts of Asia where water is considered essential for anal cleansing. This includes India, Turkey, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, and Cambodia. In those countries it is commonly installed in Western-style (sitting) toilet installations. In Thailand, it is common in both Western-style toilets and squat toilet installations. The bidet shower is similar in intent (if not method of use) to the Japanese washlet-style toilet seats, or so-called "electronic bidets".
In Europe, it is used in Finland and some Roman-speaking countries, while bidets are more common bathroom fixtures in many southern European countries. It is very common in Brazil, where traditional bidets are being replaced by it. It is also common in Arab countries and some parts of the Muslim world.


== See alsoEdit ==
Anal cleansing
Bidet
Domestic water system
Islamic toilet etiquette
Islamic hygienical jurisprudence
Lota (vessel)
Tabo
Washlet


== ReferencesEdit ==