
== Overview ==
Hansen Medical, Inc, headquartered in Mountain View, California, designs and manufactures medical robotics for positioning and control of catheter-based technologies. The Company manufactures The Sensei Robotic Catheter System and Artisan Extend Control Catheter to be used in electrophysiology procedures and The Magellan™ Robotic System and Magellan™ Robotic Catheters, indicated for navigation in the peripheral vasculature. Hansen Medical is publicly traded on NASDAQ.


== History ==
Hansen Medical was founded in 2002 by Frederic Moll, M.D. to develop tools that manipulate catheters by combining robotic technology and computerized movement.
In 2005, Hansen bought EndoVia Medical Inc., a medical robotics company that was started out of the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and physicians from the Department of Surgery at the Boston University Medical Center. EndoVia's intellectual property included 33 issued and pending patents and patent applications.
Later that year, Hansen Medical and Intuitive Surgical, another company founded by Moll, entered into a cross-licensing agreement that included Hansen's portfolio of 50 issued and pending patents and patent applications and Intuitive's 250 issued patents related to minimally invasive instruments and surgical robotics.
Hansen Medical went public in 2006, raising $75 million in its Initial Public Offering with two catheter systems under FDA review. The shares represented about 30% of the company.
In May 2014, Hansen appointed veteran medical device industry executive Cary Vance as President and Chief Executive Officer. Prior to joining Hansen, Mr. Vance served as President of the Anesthesia & Respiratory global business at Teleflex Inc., Executive Vice President at Covidien Ltd., and Vice President & General Manager at GE Healthcare.
Hansen received FDA clearance, CE mark and shipped the first Sensei® Robotic System in May 2007. First patients were treated with the Magellan Robotic System October 2010. In 2014, the Magellan 6Fr Robotic Catheter became commercially available. In addition, the Sensei X2 Robotic System was launched globally October 2014. Through November 2014, physicians worldwide have performed a cumulative total of more than 15,000 clinical cases using Hansen Medical’s robotic systems.


== Products ==
The Sensei® X Robotic System allows a physician to control a mapping catheter inside a patient’s heart during cardiac arrhythmia procedures. Sensei translates the physician’s hand motions to a robotically steered catheter using advanced robotics technology and an intuitive user interface. The physician is able to do this from a remote workstation. Potential benefits of the system include enhanced catheter stability and steering along with reduced physician fatigue. The Sensei Robotic System includes the robotic arm at the bedside, remote workstation and a robotic catheter
The Magellan Robotic System is used by physicians worldwide to navigate peripheral blood vessels in a wide variety of endovascular procedures. The Magellan is designed to deliver improved predictability, control and catheter stability in the peripheral vasculature and subsequently provide a conduit for manual placement of therapeutic devices. Physicians control the Magellan System, which translates his or her hand movements into smaller, more precise movements of tiny instruments inside the patient’s body. The procedure is performed entirely at the direction of the physician. It enables advance endovascular procedures and delivers predictable endovascular navigation in tortuous anatomy. The Magellan Robotic System includes the robotic arm at the bedside, remote workstation and a robotic catheter.


== Partnerships ==
The Sensei platform is built upon an open architecture design that has helped Hansen Medical to establish partnership agreements with leading medical device companies. In May 2009, Hansen entered into a joint development agreement with Siemens Healthcare to co-develop integrated products designed to help simplify complex cardiac procedures for the diagnosis and treatment of heart arrhythmias. In February 2011, Hansen signed a patent and technology license with Philips Healthcare allowing Phillips to develop and commercialize the non-robotic applications of Hansen Medical’s Fiber Optic Shape Sensing and Localization (FOSSL) technology.


== References ==