The ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMN, also sometimes referred to as the ventromedial hypothalamus, VMH) is a nucleus of the hypothalamus. "The ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) is a distinct morphological nucleus involved in feeding, fear, thermoregulation, and sexual activity." This nuclear region is involved with the recognition of the feeling of fullness.


== StructureEdit ==
It has four subdivisions:
anterior (VMHa)
dorsomedial (VMHdm)
ventrolateral (VMHvl)
central (VMHc).
These subdivisions differ anatomically, neurochemically, and behaviorally.


== FunctionEdit ==
The ventromedial nucleus (VMN) is most commonly associated with satiety. Early studies showed that VMN lesions caused over-eating and obesity in rats. However, the interpretation of these experiments was summarily discredited when Gold's research demonstrated that precision lesioning of the VMN did not result in hyperphagia. Nevertheless, numerous studies have shown that the immediacy of hyperphagia and obesity syndrome are a consequence of VMN lesions or procaine injections, and point to the VMN's role in satiety. A major review of the subject in 2006 concluded that, "anatomical studies done both before and after Gold's study did not replicate his results with lesions, and in nearly every published direct comparison of VMH lesions vs. PVN or VNAB lesions, the group with VMH lesions ate substantially more food and gained twice as much weight." This strongly substantiates the classification of VMN as the primary satiety center in the hypothalamus.
It has also been found that lesions to the VMH in rats caused increased plasma insulin levels. Rats with a VMH lesion compared to normal rats overproduce a circulating satiety factor, to which the control rats can respond and rats with a VMH lesion cannot respond. A lesion to the VMH makes rats overproduce leptin, which they cannot respond to causing them to over eat, leading to obesity.
Two researchers, Heterington and Ranson, looked at series of twenty-one animals of various degrees of adiposity, with respect to growth appearance, fat distribution, general physical condition, and the correlation between the level of adiposity attained and the correlation of the hypothalamic lesion. Lesions in the hypothalamic area, particularly the region of the ventromedial hypothalamus interrupts a large number of the descending fibers from the hypothalamic cell groups that were found to contribute to obesity in rats.
Taylor and Jamshi found that there seems to be a higher concentration of cannabinoid receptor mRNA within the VMH in comparison to other nuclei within the hypothalamus. The cannabinoid ingestion has been linked to rewarding processes, and also with the release of dopamine in the brain.
VMH is also important in mammal play behaviour. Lesions to VMH along with the hippocampus, amygdala, the cerebellum, and the lateral hypothalamus are all linked to reduced play 
The VMHdm has a role in the male vocalizations and scent marking behaviors.
The VMHvl plays a role in sexual behaviors in females (lordosis), thus stimulating their sexual arousal.
Bilateral FOS expression in the VMH after repeated seizures is associated with alteration in the severity of flurothyl induced seizures in C57BL/6J mice that are not present in DBA/2J mice. 


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further ReferencesEdit ==
Dugger, et al. (2007). Androgen receptors are required for full masculinization of the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) in rats.
Storlien, L., & Albert, D. (1972). The effect of vmh lesions, lateral cuts and anterior cuts on food intake, activity level, food motivation, and reactivity to taste . Physiology & Behavior, 9(2), 191–192. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/003193847290234X
Carlson, N. (2010). Physiology of behavior. (10 ed., pp. 355–357). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.


== External linksEdit ==
Diagram of Ventromedial motor tract at lemoyne.edu
New Scientist: Seat of female libido revealed (June 26, 2006)