The Hominidae (/hɒˈmɪnɨdiː/), also known as great apes or hominids, are a taxonomic family of primates that includes seven extant species in four genera: Pongo, the Bornean and Sumatran orangutan; Gorilla, the eastern and western gorilla; Pan, the common chimpanzee and bonobo; and Homo, the human.
Several revisions in classifying the great apes have caused the use of the term "hominid" to vary over time. Its original meaning referred only to humans (Homo) and their closest relatives. That restrictive meaning has now been largely assumed by the term "hominin", which comprises all members of the human clade after the split from the chimpanzees (Pan). (See below, for a fuller discussion of related and very similar terms, at Terminology.) The current, 21st century, meaning of "hominid" refers to all the great apes including humans. Usage still varies, however, and some scientists and laypersons still use "hominid" in the original restrictive sense; the scholarly literature generally shows the traditional usage until around the turn of the 21st century.
Within the taxon Hominidae, a number of extant and known extinct, that is, fossil, genera are grouped with the humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas in the subfamily Homininae; others with orangutans in the subfamily Ponginae (see classification graphic below). The most recent common ancestor of all Hominidae lived roughly 14 million years ago, when the ancestors of the orangutans speciated from the ancestral line of the other three genera. Those ancestors of the Hominidae family had already speciated from the Hylobatidae family (the gibbons), perhaps 15 million to 20 million years ago.


== HistoryEdit ==

In the early Miocene, about 22 million years ago, there were many species of arboreally adapted primitive catarrhines from East Africa; the variety suggests a long history of prior diversification. Fossils at 20 million years ago include fragments attributed to Victoriapithecus, the earliest Old World Monkey. Among the genera thought to be in the ape lineage leading up to 13 million years ago are Proconsul, Rangwapithecus, Dendropithecus, Limnopithecus, Nacholapithecus, Equatorius, Nyanzapithecus, Afropithecus, Heliopithecus, and Kenyapithecus, all from East Africa.
At sites far distant from East Africa, the presence of other generalized non-cercopithecids, that is, non-monkey primates, of middle Miocene age—Otavipithecus from cave deposits in Namibia, and Pierolapithecus and Dryopithecus from France, Spain and Austria—is further evidence of a wide diversity of ancestral ape forms across Africa and the Mediterranean basin during the relatively warm and equable climatic regimes of the early and middle Miocene. The most recent of these far-flung Miocene apes (hominoids) is Oreopithecus, from the fossil-rich coal beds in northern Italy and dated to 9 million years ago.
Molecular evidence indicates that the lineage of gibbons (family Hylobatidae), the lesser apes, diverged from that of the great apes some 18–12 million years ago, and that of orangutans (subfamily Ponginae) diverged from the other great apes at about 12 million years. There are no fossils that clearly document the ancestry of gibbons, which may have originated in a still-unknown South East Asian hominoid population; but fossil proto-orangutans, dated to around 10 million years ago, may be represented by Sivapithecus from India and Griphopithecus from Turkey.

Species close to the last common ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees and humans may be represented by Nakalipithecus fossils found in Kenya and Ouranopithecus found in Greece. Molecular evidence suggests that between 8 and 4 million years ago, first the gorillas (genus Gorilla), and then the chimpanzees (genus Pan) split off from the line leading to the humans. Human DNA is approximately 98.4% identical to that of chimpanzees when comparing single nucleotide polymorphisms (see human evolutionary genetics). The fossil record, however, of gorillas and chimpanzees is limited; both poor preservation—rain forest soils tend to be acidic and dissolve bone—and sampling bias probably contribute most to this problem.
Other hominins probably adapted to the drier environments outside the African equatorial belt; and there they encountered antelope, hyenas, dogs, pigs, elephants, horses, and other forms becoming adapted to surviving in the East African savannas, particularly the regions of the Sahel and the Serengeti. The wet equatorial belt contracted after about 8 million years ago, and there is very little fossil evidence for the divergence of the hominin lineage from that of gorillas and chimpanzees—which split was thought to have occurred around that time. The earliest fossils argued by some to belong to the human lineage are Sahelanthropus tchadensis (7 Ma) and Orrorin tugenensis (6 Ma), followed by Ardipithecus (5.5–4.4 Ma), with species Ar. kadabba and Ar. ramidus.


=== Taxonomic historyEdit ===


==== TerminologyEdit ====

The classification of the great apes has been revised several times in the last few decades; these revisions have led to a varied use of the word "hominid" over time. The original meaning of the term referred to only humans and their closest relatives—what is now the modern meaning of the term "hominin". And the meaning of the taxon Hominidae changed gradually, leading to a different (modern) usage of "hominid" that today includes all the great apes including humans.
The term hominid is easily confused with a number of very similar words:
A hominoid, commonly called an ape, is a member of the superfamily Hominoidea: extant members are the gibbons (lesser apes, family Hylobatidae) and the hominids (the great apes, family Hominidae).
A hominine is a member of the subfamily Homininae: gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans (excludes orangutans).
A hominin is a member of the subtribe Hominina of the tribe Hominini: that is, modern humans and their closest relatives after their split from chimpanzees.
A human is a member of the genus Homo, of which Homo sapiens is the only extant species, and within that Homo sapiens sapiens is the only surviving subspecies.
(See below, a graphic of the taxonomic classifications at Evolutionary tree of the Hominoidea.)
Many scientists, including paleoanthropologists, continue to use the term "hominid" to mean humans and their direct and near-direct bipedal ancestors.


==== Extant and fossil relatives of humansEdit ====

As mentioned, Hominidae was originally the name given to the family of humans and their (extinct) close relatives, with the other great apes (that is, the orangutans, gorillas, and chimpanzees) all being placed in a separate family, the Pongidae. However, that definition eventually made Pongidae paraphyletic because at least one great ape species (the chimpanzees) proved to be more closely related to humans than to other great apes. (Most taxonomists today encourage monophyletic groups—this would require, in this case, the use of Pongidae to be restricted to just one closely related grouping. Thus, many biologists now refer Pongo (as the subfamily Ponginae) to the Hominidae family; or they restrict Pongo to the orangutans and their close extinct relatives, such as Gigantopithecus.) The taxonomy shown here follows the monophyletic groupings according to the modern understanding of human and great ape relationships.
Humans and close relatives including the tribes Hominini and Gorillini form the subfamily Homininae (see classification graphic below). (A few researchers go so far as to refer the chimpanzees and the gorillas to the genus Homo along with humans.)  But, it is those fossil relatives more closely related to humans than the chimpanzees that represent the especially close members of the human family, and without necessarily assigning subfamily or tribal categories.
Many extinct hominids have been studied to help understand the relationship between modern humans and the other extant hominids. Some of the extinct members of this family include Gigantopithecus, Orrorin, Ardipithecus, Kenyanthropus, and the australopithecines Australopithecus and Paranthropus.
The exact criteria for membership in the tribe Hominini under the current understanding of human origins are not clear, but the taxon generally includes those species that share more than 97% of their DNA with the modern human genome, and exhibit a capacity for language or for simple cultures beyond their 'local family' or band. The theory of mind concept—including such faculties as empathy, attribution of mental state, and even empathetic deception—is a controversial criterion; it distinguishes the adult human alone among the hominids. Humans acquire this capacity after about four years of age, whereas it has not been proven (nor has it been disproven) that gorillas or chimpanzees ever develop a theory of mind. This is also the case for some New World monkeys outside the family of great apes, as, for example, the capuchin monkeys.
However, even without the ability to test whether early members of the Hominini (such as Homo erectus, Homo neanderthalensis, or even the australopithecines) had a theory of mind, it is difficult to ignore similarities seen in their living cousins. Orangutans have shown the development of culture comparable to that of chimpanzees, and some say the orangutan may also satisfy those criteria for the theory of mind concept. These scientific debates take on political significance for advocates of great ape personhood.


=== ClassificationEdit ===


==== Evolutionary treeEdit ====


==== ExtantEdit ====

There are seven living species of great ape which are classified in four genera. The following classification is commonly accepted:
Family Hominidae: humans and other great apes; extinct genera and species excludedSubfamily Ponginae
Tribe Pongini
Genus Pongo
Bornean orangutan, Pongo pygmaeus
Pongo pygmaeus pygmaeus
Pongo pygmaeus morio
Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii

Sumatran orangutan, Pongo abelii

Subfamily Homininae
Tribe Gorillini
Genus Gorilla
Western gorilla, Gorilla gorilla
Western lowland gorilla, Gorilla gorilla gorilla
Cross River gorilla, Gorilla gorilla diehli

Eastern gorilla, Gorilla beringei
Mountain gorilla, Gorilla beringei beringei
Eastern lowland gorilla, Gorilla beringei graueri

Tribe Hominini
Subtribe Panina
Genus Pan
Chimpanzee (common chimpanzee), Pan troglodytes
Central chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes troglodytes
Western chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes verus
Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes ellioti
Eastern chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii

Bonobo (pygmy chimpanzee), Pan paniscus

Subtribe Hominina
Genus Homo
Human, Homo sapiens
Anatomically modern human, Homo sapiens sapiens


==== FossilEdit ====

In addition to the extant species and subspecies, archaeologists, paleontologists, and anthropologists have discovered and classified numerous extinct great ape species as below, based on the taxonomy shown.
Family Hominidae
Graecopithecus (?=Ouranopithecus)† (placement debated)
Graecopithecus freybergi (?=Ouranopithecus macedoniensis)

Otavipithecus†
Otavipithecus namibiensis

Morotopithecus†
Morotopithecus bishopi

Subfamily PonginaeTribe Lufengpithecini †
Lufengpithecus
Lufengpithecus lufengensis
Lufengpithecus keiyuanensis
Lufengpithecus hudienensis

Tribe Sivapithecini†
Ankarapithecus
Ankarapithecus meteai

Sivapithecus
Sivapithecus brevirostris
Sivapithecus punjabicus
Sivapithecus parvada
Sivapithecus sivalensis
Sivapithecus indicus

Gigantopithecus
Gigantopithecus bilaspurensis
Gigantopithecus blacki
Gigantopithecus giganteus

Tribe Pongini
Khoratpithecus†
Khoratpithecus ayeyarwadyensis
Khoratpithecus piriyai
Khoratpithecus chiangmuanensis

Pongo (orangutans)
Pongo hooijeri†

Subfamily HomininaePierolapithecus†
Pierolapithecus catalaunicus

Udabnopithecus†
Udabnopithecus garedziensis

Tribe Dryopithecini †
Oreopithecus (placement disputed)
Oreopithecus bambolii

Nakalipithecus
Nakalipithecus nakayamai

Anoiapithecus
Anoiapithecus brevirostris

Hispanopithecus
Hispanopithecus laietanus
Hispanopithecus crusafonti

Dryopithecus
Dryopithecus wuduensis
Dryopithecus fontani
Dryopithecus brancoi
Dryopithecus laietanus
Dryopithecus crusafonti

Rudapithecus†
Rudapithecus hungaricus

Samburupithecus†
Samburupithecus kiptalami

Tribe Gorillini
Chororapithecus † (placement debated)
Chororapithecus abyssinicus

Tribe Hominini
Sahelanthropus†
Sahelanthropus tchadensis

Orrorin†
Orrorin tugenensis

Subtribe Hominina
Ardipithecus†
Ardipithecus ramidus
Ardipithecus kadabba

Kenyanthropus† (placement debated)
Kenyanthropus platyops

Praeanthropus†Praeanthropus bahrelghazali
Praeanthropus anamensis
Praeanthropus afarensis

Australopithecus†
Australopithecus africanus
Australopithecus garhi
Australopithecus sediba
Australopithecus deyiremeda

Paranthropus†
Paranthropus aethiopicus
Paranthropus robustus
Paranthropus boisei

Homo – immediate ancestors of modern humans
Homo gautengensis†
Homo rudolfensis†
Homo naledi†
Homo habilis†
Homo floresiensis†
Homo erectus†
Homo ergaster†
Homo antecessor†
Homo heidelbergensis†
Homo cepranensis†
Homo helmei†
Homo palaeojavanicus†
Homo tsaichangensis†
Denisovans (scientific name has not yet been assigned)†
Homo neanderthalensis†
Homo rhodesiensis†
Homo sapiens
Homo sapiens idaltu†
Archaic Homo sapiens (Cro-Magnon)†
Red Deer Cave people † (scientific name has not yet been assigned; perhaps a race of modern humans or a hybrid of modern humans and Denisovans)


== Physical descriptionEdit ==
The great apes are large, tailless primates, with the smallest living species being the bonobo at 30–40 kilograms in weight, and the largest being the eastern gorillas, with males weighing 140–180 kilograms. In all great apes, the males are, on average, larger and stronger than the females, although the degree of sexual dimorphism varies greatly among species. Although most living species are predominantly quadrupedal, they are all able to use their hands for gathering food or nesting materials, and, in some cases, for tool use.
Most species are omnivorous, but fruit is the preferred food among all but some human groups. Chimpanzees and orangutans primarily eat fruit. When gorillas run short of fruit at certain times of the year or in certain regions, they resort to eating shoots and leaves, often of bamboo, a type of grass. Gorillas have extreme adaptations for chewing and digesting such low-quality forage, but they still prefer fruit when it is available, often going miles out of their way to find especially preferred fruits. Humans, since the neolithic revolution, consume mostly cereals and other starchy foods, including increasingly highly processed foods, as well as many other domesticated plants (including fruits) and meat. Hominid teeth are similar to those of the Old World monkeys and gibbons, although they are especially large in gorillas. The dental formula is 2.1.2.32.1.2.3. Human teeth and jaws are markedly smaller for their size than those of other apes, which may be an adaptation to eating cooked food for more than a million years.

Gestation in great apes lasts 8–9 months, and results in the birth of a single offspring, or, rarely, twins. The young are born helpless, and they must be cared for long periods of time. Compared with most other mammals, great apes have a remarkably long adolescence, not being weaned for several years, and not becoming fully mature for eight to thirteen years in most species (longer in humans). As a result, females typically give birth only once every few years. There is no distinct breeding season.
The gorillas and the common chimpanzee live in family groups of around five to ten individuals, although much larger groups are sometimes noted. Chimpanzees live in larger groups that break up into smaller groups when fruit becomes less available. When small groups of female chimpanzees go off in separate directions to forage for fruit, the dominant male(s) can no longer control them and the females often mate with other subordinate males. In contrast, groups of gorillas stay together regardless of the availability of fruit. When fruit is hard to find, they resort to eating leaves and shoots. Because gorilla groups stay together, the male is able to monopolize the females in his group. This fact is related to gorillas' greater sexual dimorphism than chimpanzees'. In both chimpanzees and gorillas, the groups include at least one dominant male, and females leave the group at maturity.


== Legal statusEdit ==
Due to the close genetic relationship between humans and other great apes, certain animal rights organizations, such as the Great Ape Project, argue that nonhuman great apes are persons and should be given basic human rights. Some countries have instituted a research ban to protect great apes from any kind of scientific testing.
On June 25, 2008, the Spanish parliament supported a new law that would make "keeping apes for circuses, television commercials or filming" illegal.
On September 8, 2010, European Union banned the testing of great apes.


== ConservationEdit ==
The following table lists the estimated number of great ape individuals living outside zoos.


== See alsoEdit ==


== NotesEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
The Animal Legal and Historical Center at Michigan State University College of Law, Great Apes and the Law
Renderings of Hominid Exemplars at the Smithsonian
Additional information on great apes
NPR News: Toumaï the Human Ancestor
Hominid Species at TalkOrigins Archive
For more details on Hominid species, including excellent photos of fossil hominids
New Scientist 19 May 2003 – Chimps are human, gene study implies
Scientific American magazine (April 2006 Issue) Why Are Some Animals So Smart?
A new mediterranean hominoid-hominid link discovered, Anoiapithecus brevirostris, "Lluc": A unique Middle Miocene European hominoid and the origins of the great ape and human clade Link to graphical reconstruction