"Working Day and Night" is a song by American recording artist Michael Jackson. It is the third track from his fifth studio album, Off the Wall in 1979. The song was written and produced by Jackson. Despite not being released as a single, it has been played often on the radio and in films, becoming one of Jackson's most popular songs. Jackson also performed the song live. It is also featured on the video game, Michael Jackson: The Experience. The song had been sampled by several artists. It was remixed and released on the remix/soundtrack album, Immortal in 2011. In 2014, producer Timbaland, sampled percussion and breaths from the song and sampled them in the duet version of "Love Never Felt So Good" (with Justin Timberlake); the duet was released as a single from Xscape.


== Background ==
"Working Day and Night" was written by Michael Jackson and recorded for his studio album Off the Wall issued in August 1979. The song was not released as a single, but as the B-side for "Rock with You" in the USA, and B-side for "Off the Wall" in the UK. The song has a tempo of 128 beats per minute, making it one of Jackson's fastest songs.


== Live performances ==
"Working Day and Night" was performed by both of The Jacksons' tours, and two of Michael Jackson's first two world concert series tours as a solo artist.
The song was performed by The Jacksons' Triumph Tour in 1981 and Victory Tour in 1984. In Michael Jackson's solo tours, the song was performed live in the Bad World Tour from 1987-1989, and first two legs of Dangerous World Tour in 1992.
A live version, recorded at one of The Jacksons' 1981 Madison Square Garden concerts, was released as a track for a live album The Jacksons Live!. In 2001, the original demo recording of the song released as a bonus track on the expanded, special edition of Off the Wall. The live performance video at Jackson's Dangerous World Tour in Bucharest, Romania on October 1, 1992, was featured on the DVD in his box set The Ultimate Collection in 2004, and a live concert DVD Live in Bucharest: The Dangerous Tour in 2005. In 2012, a live audio and video version of the song performed during the Bad World Tour was released on the deluxe edition of Bad 25 and the concert DVD Live at Wembley July 16, 1988. The song was remixed and released on the soundtrack to Cirque du Soleil's Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour - Immortal in 2011.


== Personnel ==
Written and composed by Michael Jackson
Produced by Quincy Jones
Co-Produced by Michael Jackson
Lead and background vocals: Michael Jackson
Bass: Louis Johnson
Drums: John Robinson
Guitar: David Williams and Phil Upchurch
Electric piano and synthesizer: Greg Phillinganes
Synthesizer programming: Michael Boddicker
Percussion: Paulinho Da Costa, John Robinson and Michael Jackson
Horns arranged by Jerry Hey and performed by The Seawind Horns:
Trumpet and flugelhorn: Jerry Hey
Tenor, alto saxophones and flute: Larry Williams
Baritone, tenor saxophones and flute: Kim Hutchcroft
Trombone: William Reichenbach
Trumpet: Gary Grant

Rhythm and vocal arrangements by Greg Phillinganes and Michael Jackson
Vocal and Percussion arrangements by Michael Jackson


== Official Versions ==
Album Version - 5:14
Original Demo from 1978 - 4:10
Immortal Version - 3:36
Live at Triumph Tour by The Jacksons - 6:53
Live at Wembley July 16, 1988 from the Bad World Tour, available in the deluxe edition of Bad 25 - 5:55


== Covers and samples ==
In 1983, George Duke sampled this song for the "Overture" of the album Guardian of the Light.
In 1983, Alvin and the Chipmunks covered the song for the first-season Alvin and the Chipmunks episode "Uncle Harry."
In 1999, Will Smith sampled this song on his album track "Can You Feel Me" for his album Willennium.
In 1989, Richie Rich sampled this song for his single "Salsa House", from his album I Can Make You Dance.
In 2014, Timbaland sampled percussion and breaths from the song for the duet version of Jackson's posthumous song "Love Never Felt So Good", which features American recording artist Justin Timberlake for the record, Xscape


== References ==