A gorge or canyon (cañon, old spelling occasionally still used) is a deep ravine between pairs of escarpments or cliffs and is the most often carved landscape by the erosive activity of a river over geologic timescales. Rivers have a natural tendency to cut through underlying surfaces so will eventually wear away rock layers to lessen their own pitch slowing their waters; given enough time, their bottoms will gradually reach a baseline elevation—which is the same elevation as the body of water it will eventually drain into. This action, when the river source and mouth are at much different base elevations will form a canyon, particularly through regions where softer rock layers are intermingled with harder layers more resistant to weathering.
A canyon may also refer to a rift between two mountain peaks, such as those in ranges including the Rocky Mountains, the Alps, the Himalayas or the Andes. Usually a river or stream and erosion carve out such splits between mountains. Examples of mountain-type canyons are Provo Canyon in Utah or Yosemite National Park in California's Sierra Nevada. Canyons within mountains, or gorges that have an opening on only one side are called box canyons. Slot canyons are very narrow canyons, often with smooth walls.


== Etymology ==
The word canyon is Spanish in origin (cañón, pronounced: [kaˈɲon], meaning big caña, cane in English). The word canyon is generally used only in North America, while the words gorge and ravine are used in Europe and Oceania, though gorge and ravine are also used in some parts of North America. In the United States, place names generally use "canyon" in the southwest and "gorge" in the northeast, with the rest of the country graduating between these two according to geography. In Canada, "gorges" are usually narrow, and "ravines" more open and often wooded. The military-derived word defile is occasionally used in the United Kingdom.


== Formation ==
Most canyons were formed by a process of long-time erosion from a plateau or table-land level. The cliffs form because harder rock strata that are resistant to erosion and weathering remain exposed on the valley walls.
Canyons are much more common in arid than in wet areas because physical weathering has a more localized effect in arid zones. The wind and water from the river combine to erode and cut away less resistant materials such as shales. The freezing and expansion of water also serves to help form canyons. Water seeps into cracks between the rocks and freezes, pushing the rocks apart and eventually causing large chunks to break off the canyon walls, in a process known as frost wedging. Canyon walls are often formed of resistant sandstones or granite. Submarine canyons form underwater, generally at the mouths of rivers.
Sometimes large rivers run through canyons as the result of gradual geological uplift. These are called entrenched rivers, because they are unable to easily alter their course. The Colorado River in the Southwest and the Snake River in the Northwest are two examples of tectonic uplift.
Canyons often form in areas of limestone rock. As limestone is soluble to a certain extent, cave systems form in the rock. When these collapse, a canyon is left, as in the Mendip Hills in Somerset and Yorkshire Dales in Yorkshire, England.


=== Box canyon ===

A box canyon is a small ravine or canyon with steep walls on three sides, allowing access and egress only through the mouth of the canyon. Box canyons were frequently used in the American West as convenient corrals, with their entrances fenced. They were also used as kill sites for wild game, which could be driven into the confined space and killed.


== Largest canyons ==
The definition of "largest canyon" is imprecise, as a canyon can be large by its depth, length, or the total area of the canyon system. Also the inaccessibility of the major canyons in the Himalaya contributes to their not being regarded as candidates for the biggest canyon. The definition of "deepest canyon" is similarly imprecise, especially if one includes mountain canyons as well as canyons cut through relatively flat plateaus (which have a somewhat well-defined rim elevation).

The deepest canyon in the world is at the confluence of the Gilgit and Indus rivers, where the Karakoram Highway was constructed, the river flows at an elevation of about 1,000 m (3,300 ft) above sea level. To the South by 15 km, rising in one continuous sweep above the Indus, the largest such rise on the planet, is the summit of the world's 9th-highest mountain, Nanga Parbat, 8,126 m (26,660  ft) high. Rising to the north, also visible from the bridge over the Gilgit, is the westernmost of the great Himalayan peaks, Rakaposhi, 7,788 m (25,550 ft) high. That makes the Indus gorge 7,120 m (23,360 ft) deep from river to peak at that point, more than 600 m (2,000 ft) greater than the depth of the Kali Gandaki Gorge and 1,500 m (5,000 ft) deeper than the Yarlung Tsangpo Gorge. These are the three deepest canyons in the world. Only the largest mountain ranges of Asia have the scale for such canyons to have formed. The Andes of South America are high mountains, but not on the same scale as the Himalaya, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush, which all come together at the confluence of the Gilgit and the Indus in Pakistani Kashmir.
The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon (or Tsangpo Canyon), along the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet, is regarded by some as the deepest canyon in the world at 5,500 m (18,000 ft). It is slightly longer than the Grand Canyon in the United States. Others consider the Kali Gandaki Gorge in midwest Nepal as the deepest canyon, with a 6400 m (21,000 ft) difference between the level of the river and the peaks surrounding it.

Vying for deepest canyon in the Americas are the Cotahuasi Canyon and Colca Canyon, in southern Peru. Both have been measured at over 3500 m (12,000 ft) deep.
The Grand Canyon of northern Arizona in the United States, with an average depth of 1,600 m (one mile) and a volume of 4.17 trillion cubic metres, is one of the world's largest canyons. It was among the 28 finalists of the New7Wonders of Nature worldwide poll. (Some referred to it as one of the 7 natural wonders of the world.) Copper Canyon in Chihuahua, Mexico is deeper and longer than the Grand Canyon.
The largest canyon in Africa is the Fish River Canyon in Namibia.
In August 2013, the discovery of Greenland's Grand Canyon was reported. Located under an ice sheet, based on the analysis of date from Operation IceBridge, it is believed to be the longest canyon in the world.


== Cultural significance ==
Some canyons have notable cultural significance. Evidence of early humanoids has been discovered in Africa's Olduvai Gorge. In the southwestern United States, canyons are important archeologically because of the many cliff-dwellings built in such areas, largely by the ancient Pueblo people who were their first inhabitants.


== Lists ==


=== List of notable canyons and gorges ===

Americas
Atuel Canyon, Mendoza Province, Argentina
Bad Rock Canyon, Montana, United States
Big South Fork of the Cumberland River gorge, Kentucky and Tennessee
Black Canyon of the Gunnison, Colorado, United States
Breaks Canyon. Kentucky/Virginia, United States
Canyon de Chelly, Arizona, United States
Canyon Sainte-Anne, Quebec, Canada
Chicamocha Canyon, Santander, Colombia
Colca Canyon, Arequipa, Peru
Columbia River Gorge, Washington and Oregon, United States
Copper Canyon, Chihuahua, Mexico
Cotahuasi Canyon, Arequipa, Peru
Flume Gorge, New Hampshire, United States
Fraser Canyon, British Columbia, Canada
Grand Canyon, Arizona, United States
Grand Canyon of the Stikine, British Columbia, Canada
Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, Wyoming, United States
Grand Canyon of Torotoro, Torotoro, Potosi Department, Bolivia
Guartelá Canyon, Paraná, Brazil
Hells Canyon, Idaho and Oregon, United States
Horseshoe Canyon, Alberta, Canada
Huasteca Canyon, Monterrey, Mexico
Itaimbezinho, Aparados da Serra National Park, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazi
James River Gorge, Virginia, United States
Kings Canyon National Park, California, United States
Lehigh River Gorge, The Poconos, Northeastern Pennsylvania
Letchworth State Park (Genesee River Gorge), New York, United States
Linville Gorge Wilderness, North Carolina, United States
Little River Canyon, Alabama, United States
Logan Canyon, Utah, United States
New River Gorge, West Virginia, United States
Niagara Gorge, Canada/United States
Nine Mile Canyon, Utah, United States
Ouimet Canyon, Ontario, Canada
Palo Duro Canyon, Texas, United States
Painted Chasm, Chasm Provincial Park, British Columbia, Canada
Pine Creek Gorge, Pennsylvania, United States
Quechee Gorge, Vermont, United States
Red River Gorge, Kentucky, United States
Rio Grande Gorge, New Mexico, United States
Ripogenus Gorge, Maine, United States
Royal Gorge, Colorado, United States
Saturban canyon, Santander, Colombia
Somoto Canyon, Somoto, Madriz, Nicaragua
St. Christopher's Canyon (Cañon de San Cristobal), Barranquitas/Aibonito, Puerto Rico
Sumidero Canyon, Chiapas, Mexico
Tallulah Gorge, Georgia, United States
Waimea Canyon, Hawaii, United States
Africa
Blyde River Canyon, Mpumalanga, South Africa
Fish River Canyon, Namibia
Kloof, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa (The word Kloof means 'gorge' in Afrikaans)
Komati Gorge, South Africa
Lanner Gorge, South Africa
Mides Canyon, Tunisia
Olduvai Gorge, Great Rift Valley, Africa
Talari Gorges, Mali
Europe
Aragvi River Gorge, Georgia
Ardèche Gorges, Rhône-Alpes, France
Avon Gorge, Bristol, England
Bletterbach, South Tyrol, Italy
Cheddar Gorge, Somerset, England
Corrieshalloch Gorge, Ullapool, Scotland
Daluis Gorge, Provence, France
Dniester Canyon, Ukraine
Ebbor Gorge, Somerset, England
Fjaðrárgljúfur Canyon, Iceland
Gorges du Tarn, France
Gorropu, Sardinia, Italy
Greenland's Grand Canyon, Greenland
Ironbridge Gorge, Shropshire, England
Kanionet e Skraparit, Albania
Liechtensteinklamm, Salzburg (state), Austria
Matka Canyon, Republic of Macedonia
Pankisi Gorge, Georgia
Richtis Gorge, Crete, Greece
Rugova Canyon, Serbia
Samaria Gorge, Crete, Greece
Tara River Canyon, Montenegro
Verdon Gorge, Provence, France
Viamala, Graubünden, Switzerland
Vikos Gorge, Vikos–Aoös National Park, Greece
Asia
Bued Gorge, Benguet, Philippines
Charyn Canyon, Kazakhstan
Chovar Gorge, Kathmandu, Nepal
Cukang Taneuh, Pangandaran, Indonesia
Harmanköy Canyon, Bilecik, Turkey
Indus River Gorge through the Himalaya, Pakistan
Kali Gandaki Gorge, Gandaki, Nepal
Montalban Gorge, Philippines
Shnizow Canyon, Uşak, Turkey
Siq, Petra, Jordan
Soan River george, Pakistan
Taroko Gorge of Taroko National Park, Taiwan
Three Gorges, Chongqing, China
Tiger Leaping Gorge, Yunnan, China
Valla Canyon, Kure, Kastamonu, Turkey
Yarlung Zangbo Grand Canyon, Tibet Autonomous Region, China
Australia
Barfold Gorge, Victoria
Barron Gorge, Queensland
Bouldercombe Gorge, Queensland
Cambanoora Gorge, Queensland
Carnarvon Gorge, Queensland
Cataract Gorge, Tasmania
Dimond Gorge, Western Australia
Galston Gorge, New South Wales
Katherine Gorge, Northern Territory
Kings Canyon, Northern Territory
Lerderderg Gorge, Victoria
Loch Ard Gorge, Victoria
Little River Gorge, Victoria
Mossman Gorge, Queensland
Murchison River Gorge, Western Australia
Nepean Gorge, New South Wales
North and South Gorges of North Stradbroke Island, Queensland
Porcupine Gorge, Queensland
Palm Valley, Northern Territory
Ravine des Casoars, South Australia
Sturt Gorge, South Australia
Windjana Gorge, Western Australia
New Zealand
Buller Gorge, Buller, New Zealand
Manawatu Gorge, Manawatu, North Island, New Zealand
Skippers Canyon, New Zealand


=== List of other features causing gorges or canyons ===
Ardèche River, France
Bued River, Philippines
Danube River, Europe
Hérault River, France
Iron Gate, Serbia-Romania
Ruinaulta, cutting Flims Rockslide, Switzerland
Kings River of the Kings Canyon National Park, California, United States
South Nahanni River in Canada [1]
Steall Waterfall of Glen Nevis, Lochaber, Scotland
Sierra y Cañones de Guara, Alquezar, Spain


== Canyons on other planetary bodies ==
Valles Marineris on Mars, the largest known canyon in the solar system
Ithaca Chasma on Saturn's moon Tethys
Venus has many craters and canyons on its surface. The troughs on the planet are part of a system of canyons that is more than 6 400 km long.


== See also ==

Antecedent drainage stream
Canyoning
Draw (terrain)
Geomorphology
Gully
Ravine
Valley
Steephead valley


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Canyon at Wikimedia Commons