In scheduled transportation, a layover (also stopover, way station, or connection) is a point where a vehicle stops, with passengers possibly changing vehicle. For urban buses services, this typically takes a few minutes at a bus stop, usually a timepoint, during which time passengers stay on the vehicle. For air travel, where layovers are longer, passengers will exit the vehicle and wait in the terminal.


== Public transit ==
A layover for public transit is a short period of recovery time built into the schedule. Layovers are used to recover from delays caused by earlier traffic congestion or excess boarding times. During a layover there may also be a change of driver. As well as being used at the end of vehicle journeys, they can be scheduled at timing points during the journey. Layovers are often scheduled at busy stops, including bus stations. central locations and shopping malls.


== Rail and long-distance bus ==
A layover in long-distance travel by train or inter-city bus is a break that a passenger must take between vehicles in a multi-vehicle trip. It is the time spent at a terminal after leaving one vehicle and waiting to board the next. Many inter-city and international trips include layovers.
As in mass transit, a layover in long-distance travel may provide for a break taken by the operator. A vehicle is said to be laying over after it finishes its route and is waiting prior to a return trip, or else it is taking a break to change crews or for the crew to rest.


== Air ==
In air travel, a stop or transfer (from one airplane to another) is considered to be a layover or connection up to a certain maximum allowed connecting time, and a stopover or break of journey otherwise. The maximum time depends on many variables, but for most U.S. and Canadian itineraries, it is 4 hours, and for most international itineraries (including any domestic stops), it is 24 hours. In general, layovers are cheaper than stopovers, because notionally layovers are incidental to traveling between two other points, whereas stopovers are among the traveler's destinations.


== See also ==
Bus terminus
Transportation hub


== References ==