This is a list of all bird species recorded in the U.S. state of South Carolina. The avifauna of South Carolina includes 427 bird species. This number includes bird species that have been sighted in South Carolina and are believed to be of wild origin. In addition, sixteen species are confirmed as having been sighted in South Carolina but whose wild origin has been questioned. A further fourteen species are referred to as hypothetical, where the species was reported in North American Birds or The Chat but the record was not submitted to the committee. The South Carolina Bird Records Committee maintains the records for bird sightings in South Carolina and produces the list used by most birders to objectively evaluate species recorded in the state. The committee votes on the validity of new records of bird species in the state. The committee last met in 2008; since then at least five birds with the potential to be first state records were observed in South Carolina. On September 18, 2008, a likely gray flycatcher was reported in South Carolina. Also on September 18, 2008, three potential wandering tattlers were reported along the coast. On November 22, 2008, a bronzed cowbird was reported in Charleston, South Carolina. On February 8, 2009, a tropical kingbird was reported in South Carolina. On January 5, 2010, a California gull was reported in Horry County, South Carolina. These records will be reviewed by the South Carolina Bird Records Committee to determine their validity.
Official bird lists are sorted by taxonomic sequence. The taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families, genera and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) used by the South Carolina Bird Records Committee follows the conventions of the American Ornithologists' Union's (1998) Check-list of North American Birds, the recognized scientific authority on the taxonomy and nomenclature of North American birds. The American Ornithologists' Union's Committee on Classification and Nomenclature, the body responsible for maintaining and updating the Check-list, "strongly and unanimously continues to endorse the biological species concept (BSC), in which species are considered to be genetically cohesive groups of populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups". Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy provides an alternative phylogenetic arrangement based on DNA-DNA hybridization.
Unless otherwise noted, all species listed below are considered to occur regularly in South Carolina as permanent residents, summer or winter visitors, or migrants. The following codes are used to designate some species:
(I) – Introduced - a species that has been introduced to North America by people, either directly or indirectly
(E) – Extinct - a recent species that no longer exists
(P2) – Birds confirmed as being sighted in South Carolina whose wild origin is unconfirmed
(H) – Hypothetical: These birds have records published in North American Birds or The Chat, but have not been reviewed by the South Carolina Bird Records Committee.
Note: Birds marked with an asterisk (*) are not identified to species, but are distinct enough to be considered a separate entry.


== Ducks, geese and swans ==
Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae
The Anatidae family includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, bills that are flattened to a greater or lesser extent, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to special oils. In South Carolina, forty definitive species have been recorded and two of questionable origin have also been reported.

Black-bellied whistling duck, Dendrocygna autumnalis
Fulvous whistling duck, Dendrocygna bicolor
Greater white-fronted goose, Anser albifrons
Snow goose, Chen caerulescens
Ross's goose, Chen rossii
Brant, Branta bernicla
Barnacle goose, Branta leucopsis (P2)
Cackling goose, Branta hutchinsii
Canada goose, Branta canadensis
Mute swan, Cygnus olor
Trumpeter swan, Cygnus buccinator (P2)
Tundra swan, Cygnus columbianus
Wood duck, Aix sponsa
Gadwall, Anas strepera
Eurasian wigeon, Anas penelope
American wigeon, Anas americana
American black duck, Anas rubripes
Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos
Mottled duck, Anas fulvigula
Blue-winged teal, Anas discors
Cinnamon teal, Anas cyanoptera
Northern shoveler, Anas clypeata
Northern pintail, Anas acuta
Green-winged teal, Anas crecca
Canvasback, Aythya valisineria
Redhead, Aythya americana
Ring-necked duck, Aythya collaris
Greater scaup, Aythya marila
Lesser scaup, Aythya affinis
King eider, Somateria spectabilis
Common eider, Somateria mollissima
Harlequin duck, Histrionicus histrionicus
Surf scoter, Melanitta perspicillata
White-winged scoter, Melanitta fusca
Black scoter, Melanitta americana
Long-tailed duck, Clangula hyemalis
Bufflehead, Bucephala albeola
Common goldeneye, Bucephala clangula
Hooded merganser, Lophodytes cucullatus
Common merganser, Mergus merganser
Red-breasted merganser, Mergus serrator
Ruddy duck, Oxyura jamaicensis


== Pheasants, turkeys and grouse ==
Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae
Phasianidae consists of the pheasants and their allies. These are terrestrial species, variable in size but generally plump, with broad, relatively short wings. Many species are game birds or have been domesticated as a food source for humans. Turkeys have a distinctive fleshy wattle that hangs from the underside of the beak and a fleshy protuberance that hangs from the top of its beak called a snood. As with many galliform species, the female (the hen) is smaller and much less colorful than the male (the tom). With wingspans of 4.9–5.9 feet (1.5–1.8 m), the turkeys are the largest birds in the open forests in which they live and are rarely mistaken for any other species. Grouse inhabit temperate and subarctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere. They are game birds and are sometimes hunted for food. In all of South Carolina's species, males are polygamous and have elaborate courtship displays. These heavily built birds have legs feathered to the toes. Most species are year-round residents and do not migrate. Three species have been recorded in South Carolina.
Ring-necked pheasant, Phasianus colchicus (P2)
Wild turkey, Meleagris gallopavo
Ruffed grouse, Bonasa umbellus


== New World quail ==
Order: Galliformes   Family: Odontophoridae
The New World quails are small, plump terrestrial birds only distantly related to the quails of the Old World, but named for their similar appearance and habits. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Northern bobwhite, Colinus virginianus


== Loons ==

Order: Gaviiformes   Family: Gaviidae
Loons are aquatic birds the size of a large duck, to which they are unrelated. Their plumage is largely gray or black, and they have spear-shaped bills. Loons swim well and fly adequately, but, because their legs are placed towards the rear of the body, are extremely poor at walking. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
Red-throated loon, Gavia stellata
Pacific loon, Gavia pacifica
Common loon, Gavia immer


== Grebes ==

Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small- to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land. In South Carolina, five species have been recorded.
Pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps
Horned grebe, Podiceps auritus
Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena
Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis
Western grebe, Aechmorphorus occidentalis


== Fulmars, petrels and shearwaters ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae
The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterized by united nostrils with medium septum and a long outer functional primary. In South Carolina, eight species have been recorded.

Northern fulmar, Fulmarus glacialis
Black-capped petrel, Pterodroma hasitata
Cory's shearwater, Calonectris diomedea
Great shearwater, Puffinus gravis
Sooty shearwater, Puffinus griseus
Manx shearwater, Puffinus puffinus
Audubon's shearwater, Puffinus lherminieri
Barolo shearwater, Puffinus baroli


== Storm-petrels ==

Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae
The storm-petrels are the smallest seabirds. They are relatives of the petrels and feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. Their flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
Wilson's storm-petrel, Oceanites oceanicus
Leach's storm-petrel, Oceanodroma leucorhoa
Band-rumped storm-petrel, Oceanodroma castro


== Tropicbirds ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Phaethontidae
Tropicbirds are slender white birds of tropical oceans, with exceptionally long central tail feathers. Their long wings have black markings, as does the head. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
White-tailed tropicbird, Phaethon lepturus
Red-billed tropicbird, Phaethon aethereus


== Boobies and gannets ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium-large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish. In South Carolina, four species have been recorded.
Masked booby, Sula dactylatra
Brown booby, Sula leucogaster
Red-footed booby, Sula sula
Northern gannet, Morus bassanus


== Pelicans ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae
Pelicans are large waterbirds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. Like other birds in the order Pelecaniformes, they have four webbed toes. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
American white pelican, Pelecanus erythrorhynchos
Brown pelican, Pelecanus occidentalis


== Cormorants ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Cormorants are medium-to-large aquatic birds, usually with mainly dark plumage and areas of colored skin on the face. The bill is long, thin and sharply hooked. Their feet are four-toed and webbed, a distinguishing feature among the Pelecaniformes order. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
Double-crested cormorant, Phalacrocorax auritus
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo


== Darters ==

Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Anhingidae
Darters are cormorant-like water birds with long necks and long, straight beaks. They are fish eaters and often swim with only their neck above water giving them the appearance of a snake. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Anhinga, Anhinga anhinga


== Frigatebirds ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Fregatidae
Frigatebirds are large seabirds usually found over tropical oceans. They are large, black or black-and-white, with long wings and deeply forked tails. The males have colored inflatable throat pouches. They do not swim or walk and cannot take off from a flat surface. Having the largest wingspan-to-body-weight ratio of any bird, they are essentially aerial, able to stay aloft for more than a week. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Magnificent frigatebird, Fregata magnificens


== Bitterns, herons and egrets ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the herons, egrets and bitterns. Herons and egrets are medium- to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter-necked and more secretive. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills. In South Carolina, twelve species have been recorded.
American bittern, Botaurus lentiginosus
Least bittern, Ixobrychus exilis
Great blue heron, Ardea herodias
Great egret, Ardea alba
Snowy egret, Egretta thula
Little blue heron, Egretta caerulea
Tricolored heron, Egretta tricolor
Reddish egret, Egretta rufescens
Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis
Green heron, Butorides virescens
Black-crowned night heron, Nycticorax nycticorax
Yellow-crowned night heron, Nyctanassa violacea


== Ibises and spoonbills ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
Threskiornithidae includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings and their bodies tend to be elongated, the neck more so, with rather long legs. The bill is also long and decurved in the case of the ibises, and straight and distinctively flattened in the spoonbills. In South Carolina, three species have occurred along with one species of questionable origin.
American white ibis, Eudocimus albus
Scarlet ibis, Eudocimus ruber (P2)
Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus
Roseate spoonbill, Platalea ajaja


== Storks ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, heavy, long-legged, long-necked wading birds with long stout bills and wide wingspans. They lack the powder down that other wading birds such as herons, spoonbills and ibises use to clean off fish slime. Storks lack a pharynx and are mute. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Wood stork, Mycteria americana


== Flamingoes ==
Order: Phoenicopteriformes   Family: Phoenicopteridae
Flamingoes are gregarious wading birds, usually 3 to 5 feet (0.9 to 1.5 m) tall, found in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres. Flamingos filter-feed on shellfish and algae. Their oddly shaped beaks are specially adapted to separate mud and silt from the food they consume and, uniquely, are used upside-down. There are six species worldwide, of which one species of questionable origin and one hypothetical species have been recorded.
Greater flamingo, Phoencopterus roseus (H)
Chilean flamingo, Phoencopterus chilenses (P2)


== New World vultures ==

Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Cathartidae
The New World vultures are not closely related to Old World vultures, but superficially resemble them because of convergent evolution. Like the Old World vultures, they are scavengers. However, unlike Old World vultures, which find carcasses by sight, New World vultures have a good sense of smell with which they locate carcasses. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
American black vulture, Coragyps atratus
Turkey vulture, Cathartes aura


== Osprey ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Pandionidae
The osprey is a medium-large fish-eating bird of prey or raptor. It is widely distributed because it tolerates a wide variety of habitats, nesting in any location that is near a body of water and provides an adequate food supply. It is the only member of its family.
Osprey, Pandion haliaetus


== Hawks, kites and eagles ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Accipitridae
The Accipitridae family of birds of prey includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have large powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight. In South Carolina, fifteen species have been recorded as well as one hypothetical species.

Swallow-tailed kite, Elanoides forficatus
White-tailed kite, Elanus leucurus
Snail kite, Rostrhamus sociabilis
Mississippi kite, Ictinia mississippiensis
Bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus
Northern harrier, Circus cyaneus
Sharp-shinned hawk, Accipiter striatus
Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii
Northern goshawk, Accipiter gentilis
Red-shouldered hawk, Buteo lineatus
Broad-winged hawk, Buteo platypterus
Swainson's hawk, Buteo swainsoni
Red-tailed hawk, Buteo jamaicensis
Rough-legged hawk, Buteo lagopus
Short-tailed hawk, Buteo brachyurus (H)
Golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos


== Caracaras and falcons ==

Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey, notably the falcons and caracaras. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded as well as two of questionable origin.
Crested caracara, Caracara cheriway (P2)
American kestrel, Falco sparverius
Merlin, Falco columbarius
Prairie falcon, Falco mexicanus (P2)
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus


== Rails, gallinules and coots ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae
Rallidae is a large family of small- to medium-sized birds that includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. Most members of this family occupy dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes that are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers. In South Carolina, nine species have been recorded as well as one hypothetical.

Yellow rail, Coturnicops noveboracensis
Black rail, Laterallus jamaicensis
Clapper rail, Rallus crepitans
King rail, Rallus elegans
Virginia rail, Rallus limicola
Sora, Porzana carolina
Purple gallinule, Porphyrio martinica
Common gallinule, Gallinula galeata
American coot, Fulica americana
Caribbean coot, Fulica caribaea (H)


== Limpkins ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Aramidae
The limpkin is a large bird in a monotypic family. It is similar in appearance to the rails, but skeletally it is closer to the cranes. It is found in marshes and gets its common name from its appearance of limping as it walks. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Limpkin, Aramus guarauna


== Cranes ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae
Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances". In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
Sandhill crane, Grus canadensis
Whooping crane, Grus americana


== Lapwings and plovers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae
The Charadriidae family includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small- to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are usually found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water. In South Carolina, nine species have been recorded.
Northern lapwing, Vanellus vanellus
Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola
American golden plover, Pluvialis dominica
Snowy plover, Charadrius nivosus
Wilson's plover, Charadrius wilsonia
Semipalmated plover, Charadrius semipalmatus
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus
Killdeer, Charadrius vociferus
Mountain plover, Charadrius montanus


== Oystercatchers ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Haematopodidae
The oystercatchers are large and noisy plover-like birds, with strong bills used for smashing or prying open molluscs. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
American oystercatcher, Haematopus palliatus


== Stilts and avocets ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds that includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
Black-necked stilt, Himantopus mexicanus
American avocet, Recurvirostra americana


== Sandpipers, curlews, stints, godwits, snipes and phalaropes ==

Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae
Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small- to medium-sized shorebirds, including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of Scolopacidae species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Different lengths of legs and bills enable multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. In South Carolina, thirty-five species have been recorded in addition to two hypothetical species.
Spotted sandpiper, Actitis macularius
Solitary sandpiper, Tringa solitaria
Spotted redshank, Tringa erythropus (H)
Greater yellowlegs, Tringa melanoleuca
Willet, Tringa semipalmata
Lesser yellowlegs, Tringa flavipes
Upland sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda
Eskimo curlew, Numenius borealis (E?)
Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus
Long-billed curlew, Numenius americanus
Black-tailed godwit, Limosa limosa (H)
Hudsonian godwit, Limosa haemastica
Marbled godwit, Limosa fedoa
Ruddy turnstone, Arenaria interpres
Red knot, Calidris canutus
Sanderling, Calidris alba
Semipalmated sandpiper, Calidris pusilla
Western sandpiper, Calidris mauri
Red-necked stint, Calidris ruficollis
Least sandpiper, Calidris minutilla
White-rumped sandpiper, Calidris fuscicollis
Baird's sandpiper, Calidris bairdii
Pectoral sandpiper, Calidris melanotos
Sharp-tailed sandpiper, Calidris acuminata
Purple sandpiper, Calidris maritima
Dunlin, Calidris alpina
Curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea
Stilt sandpiper, Calidris himantopus
Buff-breasted sandpiper, Tryngites subruficollis
Ruff, Philomachus pugnax
Short-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus griseus
Long-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus scolopaceus
Wilson's snipe, Gallinago delicata
American woodcock, Scolopax minor
Wilson's phalarope, Phalaropus tricolor
Red-necked phalarope, Phalaropus lobatus
Red phalarope, Phalaropus fulicarius


== Gulls, terns and skimmers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae
Gulls are typically medium-to-large birds, usually gray or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. The large species take up to four years to attain full adult plumage, but two years is typical for small gulls. In South Carolina, thirteen species have been recorded. Terns are in general medium-to-large birds, typically with gray or white plumage, often with black markings on the head. They have longish bills and webbed feet. They are lighter bodied and more streamlined than gulls and look elegant in flight with long tails and long narrow wings. In South Carolina, fourteen species have been recorded. Skimmers are tropical and subtropical species. They have an elongated lower mandible which they use by flying low over the water surface skimming the water for small fish. One species has been recorded in South Carolina.

Black-legged kittiwake, Rissa tridactyla
Sabine's gull, Xema sabini
Bonaparte's gull, Chroicocephalus philadelphia
Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus
Little gull, Hydrocoloeus minutus
Laughing gull, Leucophaeus atricilla
Franklin's gull, Leucophaeus pipixcan
Ring-billed gull, Larus delawarensis
California gull, Larus californicus
Herring gull, Larus argentatus
Iceland gull, Larus glaucoides
Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus
Glaucous gull, Larus hyperboreus
Great black-backed gull, Larus marinus
Brown noddy, Anous stolidus
Sooty tern, Onychoprion fuscata
Bridled tern, Onychoprion anaethetus
Least tern, Sternula antillarum
Gull-billed tern, Gelochelidon nilotica
Caspian tern, Hydroprogne caspia
Black tern, Chlidonias niger
White-winged tern, Chlidonias leucopterus
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii
Common tern, Sterna hirundo
Arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea
Forster's tern, Sterna forsteri
Royal tern, Thalasseus maxima
Sandwich tern, Thalasseus sandvicensis
Black skimmer, Rynchops niger


== Skuas ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae

The skuas are in general medium-to-large birds, typically with gray or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They have longish bills with hooked tips and webbed feet with sharp claws. They look like large dark gulls, but have a fleshy cere above the upper mandible. They are strong, acrobatic fliers. Three species have been recorded to species level in South Carolina, while a skua has been seen but its species was not identified. Additionally, there is a hypothetical record of a south polar skua.
*skua species, Stercorarius species
South polar skua, Stercorarius maccormicki (H)
Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus
Parasitic jaeger, Stercorarius parasiticus
Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus


== Auks, murres and puffins ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Alcidae
Alcids are superficially similar to penguins due to their black-and-white colors, their upright posture and some of their habits; however, they are not related to the penguins and are able to fly. Auks live on the open sea, only deliberately coming ashore to nest. In South Carolina, six species have been recorded.
Dovekie, Alle alle
Common murre, Uria aalge
Thick-billed murre, Uria lomvia
Razorbill, Alca torda
Black guillemot, Cepphus grylle
Long-billed murrelet, Brachyramphus perdix


== Pigeons and doves ==

Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere. In South Carolina, seven species have been recorded, one of which is extinct, in addition to one species of questionable origin.
Rock dove, Columba livia (I)
Band-tailed pigeon, Patagioenas fasciata
Eurasian collared-dove, Streptopelia decaocto (I)
African collared-dove, Streptopelia roseogrisea (P2)
White-winged dove, Zenaida asiatica
Mourning dove, Zenaida macroura
Passenger pigeon, Ectopistes migratorius (E)
Common ground dove, Columbina passerina


== Lories, parakeets, macaws and parrots ==
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittacidae
Parrots are small-to-large birds with a characteristic curved beak. Their upper mandibles have slight mobility in the joint with the skull and they have a generally erect stance. All parrots are zygodactyl, having the four toes on each foot placed two at the front and two at the back. In South Carolina one extinct species has been recorded as well as three species of questionable origin.
Carolina parakeet, Conuropsis carolinensis (E)
Budgerigar, Melopsittacus undulatus (P2)
Monk parakeet, Myiopsitta monachus (P2)
Green parakeet, Aratinga holochlora (P2)


== Cuckoos, roadrunners and anis ==

Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These are birds of various sizes with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. In South Carolina, four species have been recorded.
Yellow-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus
Black-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus erythropthalmus
Smooth-billed ani, Crotophaga ani
Groove-billed ani, Crotophaga sulcirostris


== Barn owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae
Barn owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Barn owl, Tyto alba


== Typical owls ==

Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae
The typical owls are small-to-large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk. In South Carolina, eight species have been recorded.
Eastern screech owl, Megascops asio
Great horned owl, Bubo virginianus
Snowy owl, Bubo scandiacus
Burrowing owl, Athene cunicularia
Barred owl, Strix varia
Long-eared owl, Asio otus
Short-eared owl, Asio flammeus
Northern saw-whet owl, Aegolius acadicus


== Nightjars ==

Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet that are of little use for walking and long, pointed wings. Their soft plumage is cryptically colored to resemble bark or leaves. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
Common nighthawk, Chordeiles minor
Chuck-will's-widow, Antrostomus carolinensis
Eastern whip-poor-will, Antrostomus vociferus


== Swifts ==
Order: Apodiformes   Family: Apodidae
The swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Chimney swift, Chaetura pelagica


== Hummingbirds ==
Order: Apodiformes   Family: Trochilidae

Hummingbirds are small birds capable of hovering in mid-air due to the rapid flapping of their wings. They are the only birds that can fly backwards. In South Carolina, eight species have been recorded in addition to one hypothetical species.
Cuban emerald, Chlorostilbon ricordii (H)
Broad-billed hummingbird, Cynanthus latirostris
Buff-bellied hummingbird, Amazilia yucatanensis
Blue-throated hummingbird, Lampornis clemenciae
Ruby-throated hummingbird, Archilochus colubris
Black-chinned hummingbird, Archilochus alexandri
Calliope hummingbird, Selasphorus calliope
Rufous hummingbird, Selasphorus rufus
Allen's hummingbird, Selasphorus sasin


== Kingfishers ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Cerylidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Belted kingfisher, Megaceryle alcyon


== Woodpeckers, sapsuckers and flickers ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae

Woodpeckers are small- to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks. In South Carolina, nine species have been recorded, one of which is presumed extinct.
Red-headed woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus
Red-bellied woodpecker, Melanerpes carolinus
Yellow-bellied sapsucker, Sphyrapicus varius
Downy woodpecker, Picoides pubescens
Hairy woodpecker, Picoides villosus
Red-cockaded woodpecker, Picoides borealis
Northern flicker, Colaptes auratus
Pileated woodpecker, Dryocopus pileatus
Ivory-billed woodpecker, Campephilus principalis (E?)


== Tyrant flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Tyrannidae

Tyrant flycatchers are passerine birds which occur throughout North and South America. They superficially resemble the Old World flycatchers, but are more robust and have stronger bills. They do not have the sophisticated vocal capabilities of the songbirds. Most, but not all, have rather plain plumage. As the name implies, most are insectivorous. In South Carolina, fifteen species have been recorded as well as three hypothetical species.
Olive-sided flycatcher, Contopus cooperi
Eastern wood pewee, Contopus virens
Yellow-bellied flycatcher, Empidonax flaviventris
Acadian flycatcher, Empidonax virescens
Alder flycatcher, Empidonax alnorum (H)
Willow flycatcher, Empidonax traillii
Least flycatcher, Empidonax minimus
Eastern phoebe, Sayornis phoebe
Say's phoebe, Sayornis saya
Vermilion flycatcher, Pyrocephalus rubinus
Ash-throated flycatcher, Myiarchus cinerascens (H)
Great crested flycatcher, Myiarchus crinitus
Tropical/Couch's kingbird, Tyrannus melancholicus/couchii (H)
Western kingbird, Tyrannus verticalis
Eastern kingbird, Tyrannus tyrannus
Gray kingbird, Tyrannus dominicensis
Scissor-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus forficatus
Fork-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus savana


== Shrikes ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus


== Vireos ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vireonidae
The vireos are a group of small- to medium-sized passerine birds restricted to the New World. They are typically greenish and resemble the wood warblers, except for their heavier bills. In South Carolina, seven species have been recorded.

White-eyed vireo, Vireo griseus
Bell's vireo, Vireo bellii
Yellow-throated vireo, Vireo flavifrons
Blue-headed vireo, Vireo solitarius
Warbling vireo, Vireo gilvus
Philadelphia vireo, Vireo philadelphicus
Red-eyed vireo, Vireo olivaceus


== Jays, crows, magpies and ravens ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae
The Corvidae family includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size for the Passeriformes. Some of the larger species show high levels of learned behavior. In South Carolina, four species have been recorded as well as one species of questionable origin and one hypothetical.
Blue jay, Cyanocitta cristata
Black-billed magpie, Pica hudsonia (H)
House crow, Corvus splendens (P2)
American crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos
Fish crow, Corvus ossifragus
Common raven, Corvus corax


== Larks ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. They feed on insects and seeds. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris


== Swallows and martins ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae

The Hirundinidae family is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. Their feet are designed for perching rather than walking and the front toes are partially joined at the base. In South Carolina, seven species have been recorded.
Purple martin, Progne subis
Tree swallow, Tachycineta bicolor
Northern rough-winged swallow, Stelgidopteryx serripennis
Bank swallow, Riparia riparia
Cliff swallow, Petrochelidon pyrrhonota
Cave swallow, Petrochelidon fulva
Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica


== Chickadees and titmice ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae
The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet which includes seeds and insects. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded as well as one hypothetical species.
Carolina chickadee, Poecile carolinensis
Black-capped chickadee, Poecile atricapillus (H)
Tufted titmouse, Baeolophus bicolor


== Bushtits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Aegithalidae
Long-tailed tits are a group of small passerine birds with medium-to-long tails. They make woven bag nests in trees. Most eat a mixed diet which includes insects. One hypothetical species has been recorded in South Carolina.
Bushtit, Psaltriparus minimus (H)


== Nuthatches ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae
Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike other birds, which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
Red-breasted nuthatch, Sitta canadensis
White-breasted nuthatch, Sitta carolinensis
Brown-headed nuthatch, Sitta pusilla


== Treecreepers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae
Treecreepers are small woodland birds with brown backs and white underparts. They have thin, pointed, down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Brown creeper, Certhia americana


== Wrens ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae

Wrens are small and inconspicuous birds, except for their loud songs. They have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous. In South Carolina, six species have been recorded.
Carolina wren, Thryothorus ludovicianus
Bewick's wren, Thryomanes bewickii
House wren, Troglodytes aedon
Winter wren, Troglodytes hiemalis
Sedge wren, Cistothorus platensis
Marsh wren, Cistothorus palustris


== Kinglets ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae
The kinglets are a family of small insectivorous birds in the genus Regulus. The adults have colored crowns, giving rise to their name. In South Carolina, two species have been recorded.
Golden-crowned kinglet, Regulus satrapa
Ruby-crowned kinglet, Regulus calendula


== Gnatcatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Polioptilidae
These dainty birds resemble Old World warblers in their structure and habits, moving restlessly through foliage while seeking insects. The gnatcatchers are mainly a soft bluish gray in color and have the long sharp bill typical of an insectivore. Many species have distinctive black head patterns (especially males) and long, regularly cocked black-and-white tails. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Blue-gray gnatcatcher, Polioptila caerulea


== Old World flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe (H)


== Thrushes ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that are mainly but not exclusively in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small- to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. In South Carolina, nine species have been recorded, in addition to one hypothetical species.
Eastern bluebird, Sialia sialis
Townsend's solitaire, Myadestes townsendi
Veery, Catharus fuscescens
Gray-cheeked thrush, Catharus minimus
Bicknell's thrush, Catharus bicknelli
Swainson's thrush, Catharus ustulatus
Hermit thrush, Catharus guttatus
Wood thrush, Hylocichla mustelina
American robin, Turdus migratorius
Varied thrush, Ixoreus naevius


== Mockingbirds and thrashers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Mimidae
The mimids are a family of passerine birds that includes thrashers, mockingbirds, tremblers and the New World catbirds. These birds are notable for their vocalization, especially their remarkable ability to mimic a wide variety of birds and other sounds heard outdoors. The species' appearance tends towards dull grays and browns. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
Gray catbird, Dumetella carolinensis
Northern mockingbird, Mimus polyglottos
Brown thrasher, Toxostoma rufum


== Starlings ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small- to medium-sized Old World passerine birds with strong feet. Their flight is strong and direct and most are gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country, and they eat insects and fruit. The plumage of several species is dark with a metallic sheen. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris (I)


== Wagtails and pipits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground-feeding insectivores of open country. In South Carolina, three species have been recorded.
White wagtail, Motacilla alba
American pipit, Anthus rubescens
Sprague's pipit, Anthus spragueii


== Waxwings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Bombycillidae
The waxwings are a group of birds with soft silky plumage and unique red tips to some of the wing feathers. In the Bohemian and cedar waxwings, these tips look like sealing wax and give the group its name. These are arboreal birds of northern forests. They live on insects in summer and berries in winter. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
Cedar waxwing, Bombycilla cedrorum


== Longspurs and snow buntings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae
Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus
Smith's longspur, Calcarius pictus
Snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis


== Wood warblers ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Parulidae
The New World warblers are a group of small, often colorful passerine birds restricted to the New World. Most are arboreal but some, such as the ovenbird, are more terrestrial. Most members of this family are insectivores. In South Carolina, forty species have been recorded, including one that may be extinct.
Bachman's warbler, Vermivora bachmanii (E?)
Blue-winged warbler, Vermivora cyanoptera
Golden-winged warbler, Vermivora chrysoptera
Tennessee warbler, Oreothlypis peregrina
Orange-crowned warbler, Oreothlypis celata
Nashville warbler, Oreothlypis ruficapilla
Northern parula, Setophaga americana
Yellow warbler, Setophaga petechia
Chestnut-sided warbler, Setophaga pensylvanica
Magnolia warbler, Setophaga magnolia
Cape May warbler, Setophaga tigrina
Black-throated blue warbler, Setophaga caerulescens
Yellow-rumped warbler, Setophaga coronata
Black-throated gray warbler, Setophaga nigrescens
Black-throated green warbler, Setophaga virens
Blackburnian warbler, Setophaga fusca
Yellow-throated warbler, Setophaga dominica
Pine warbler, Setophaga pinus
Kirtland's warbler, Setophaga kirtlandii
Prairie warbler, Setophaga discolor
Palm warbler, Setophaga palmarum
Bay-breasted warbler, Setophaga castanea
Blackpoll warbler, Setophaga striata
Cerulean warbler, Setophaga cerulea
Hooded warbler, Setophaga citrina
American redstart, Setophaga ruticilla
Black-and-white warbler, Mniotilta varia
Prothonotary warbler, Protonotaria citrea
Worm-eating warbler, Helmitheros vermivorum
Swainson's warbler, Limnothlypis swainsonii
Ovenbird, Seiurus aurocapilla
Northern waterthrush, Parkesia noveboracensis
Louisiana waterthrush, Parkesia motacilla
Connecticut warbler, Oporornis agilis
Kentucky warbler, Geothlypis formosa
Mourning warbler, Geothlypis philadelphia
Common yellowthroat, Geothlypis trichas
Wilson's warbler, Cardellina pusilla
Canada warbler, Cardellina canadensis
Yellow-breasted chat, Icteria virens


== Tanagers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Thraupidae
The tanagers are a large group of small- to medium-sized passerine birds that inhabit the New World, mainly in the tropics. Many species are brightly colored. They are seed eaters, but prefer fruit and nectar. Most have short, rounded wings. In South Carolina, one species of questionable origin has been recorded.
Red-crested cardinal, Paroaria coronata (P2)


== American sparrows, towhees and juncos ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae
Emberizidae is a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. In Europe, most species are called buntings. In North America, most of the species in this family are known as sparrows, but these birds are not closely related to the Old World sparrows, which are in the family Passeridae. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns. In South Carolina, twenty-seven species have been recorded.
Green-tailed towhee, Pipilo chlorurus
Spotted towhee, Pipilo maculatus
Eastern towhee, Pipilo erythrophthalmus
Bachman's sparrow, Peucaea aestivalis
American tree sparrow, Spizelloides arborea
Chipping sparrow, Spizella passerina
Clay-colored sparrow, Spizella pallida
Field sparrow, Spizella pusilla
Vesper sparrow, Pooecetes gramineus
Lark sparrow, Chondestes grammacus
Lark bunting, Calamospiza melanocorys
Savannah sparrow, Passerculus sandwichensis
Grasshopper sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum
Henslow's sparrow, Ammodramus henslowii
Le Conte's sparrow, Ammodramus leconteii
Nelson's sparrow, Ammodramus nelsoni
Saltmarsh sparrow, Ammodramus caudacutus
Seaside sparrow, Ammodramus maritimus
Fox sparrow, Passerella iliaca
Song sparrow, Melospiza melodia
Lincoln's sparrow, Melospiza lincolnii
Swamp sparrow, Melospiza georgiana
White-throated sparrow, Zonotrichia albicollis
Harris's sparrow, Zonotrichia querula
White-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia leucophrys
Golden-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia atricapilla
Dark-eyed junco, Junco hyemalis


== Cardinals, saltators and grosbeaks ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cardinalidae
The cardinals are a family of robust, seed-eating passerines with strong bills. They typically live in open woodland. The sexes usually have distinct plumage. In South Carolina, eleven species have been recorded.
Summer tanager, Piranga olivacea
Scarlet tanager, Piranga olivacea
Western tanager, Piranga ludoviciana
Northern cardinal, Cardinalis cardinalis
Rose-breasted grosbeak, Pheucticus ludovicianus
Black-headed grosbeak, Pheucticus melanocephalus
Blue grosbeak, Passerina caerulea
Lazuli bunting, Passerina amoena
Indigo bunting, Passerina cyanea
Painted bunting, Passerina ciris
Dickcissel, Spiza americana


== Blackbirds, meadowlarks, cowbirds, grackles and orioles ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Icteridae
The icterids are a group of small-to-medium-sized, often colorful passerine birds restricted to the New World and include the grackles, New World blackbirds and New World orioles. Most species have black as a predominant plumage color, often enlivened by yellow, orange or red. In South Carolina, fourteen species have been recorded, in addition to one species of questionable origin.

Bobolink, Dolichonyx oryzivorus
Red-winged blackbird, Agelaius phoeniceus
Eastern meadowlark, Sturnella magna
Western meadowlark, Sturnella neglecta
Yellow-headed blackbird, Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus
Rusty blackbird, Euphagus carolinus
Brewer's blackbird, Euphagus cyanocephalus
Common grackle, Quiscalus quiscula
Boat-tailed grackle, Quiscalus major
Shiny cowbird, Molothrus bonariensis
Brown-headed cowbird, Molothrus ater
Orchard oriole, Icterus spurius
Venezuelan troupial, Icterus icterus (P2)
Bullock's oriole, Icterus bullockii
Baltimore oriole, Icterus galbula


== Finches ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae

Finches are seed-eating passerines that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well. In South Carolina, nine definitive species have been recorded along with one species of questionable origin.
Pine grosbeak, Pinicola enucleator
Purple finch, Haemorhous purpureus
House finch, Haemorhous mexicanus
Red crossbill, Loxia curvirostra
White-winged crossbill, Loxia leucoptera
Common redpoll, Acanthis flammea
Pine siskin, Spinus carduelis
American goldfinch, Spinus tristis
European goldfinch, Carduelis tristis (P2)
Evening grosbeak, Coccothraustes vespertinus


== Old World sparrows ==

Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae
Old World sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, these sparrows tend to be small plump brownish or grayish birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects. In South Carolina, one species has been recorded.
House sparrow, Passer domesticus (I)


== Weavers and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Ploceidae
The weavers are small passerine birds related to the finches. They are seed-eating birds with rounded conical bills. The males of many species are brightly colored, usually in red or yellow and black. Some species show variation in color only in the breeding season. One species of questionable origin has been seen in South Carolina.
Village weaver, Ploceus cucullatus (P2)


== See also ==
List of birds
Lists of birds by region
List of North American birds
List of mammals of South Carolina
List of snakes of South Carolina


== References ==
General
""Official list of the birds of South Carolina" (PDF). Carolina Bird Club. Retrieved 2010-02-20. 
Specific
^ "Great Carolina Wren". Birds of America. Audubon. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ a b "Official list of the birds of South Carolina" (PDF). Carolina Bird Club. Retrieved 2010-02-20. 
^ "Official list of the birds of the Carolinas". Carolina Bird Club. Retrieved 2010-02-20. 
^ "Check-list of North American Birds, Seventh Edition". American Ornithologists' Union. Archived from the original on 2007-12-11. Retrieved 2007-12-15. 


== External links ==
Carolina Bird Club website
Recent bird sitings in the Carolinas