Pericardial effusion ("fluid around the heart") is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pericardial cavity. Because of the limited amount of space in the pericardial cavity, fluid accumulation leads to an increased intrapericardial pressure which can negatively affect heart function. A pericardial effusion with enough pressure to adversely affect heart function is called cardiac tamponade. Pericardial effusion usually results from a disturbed equilibrium between the production and re-absorption of pericardial fluid, or from a structural abnormality that allows fluid to enter the pericardial cavity.
Normal levels of pericardial fluid are from 15 to 50 mL.


== Signs and symptomsEdit ==
Chest pain or pressure are common symptoms. A small effusion may be asymptomatic. Larger effusions may cause cardiac tamponade, a life-threatening complication; signs of impending tamponade include dyspnea, low blood pressure, and distant heart sounds.
The so-called "water-bottle heart" is a radiographic sign of pericardial effusion, in which the cardiopericardial silhouette is enlarged and assumes the shape of a flask or water bottle.
It can be associated with dullness to percussion over the left subscapular area due to compression of the left lung base. This phenomenon is known as Ewart's sign.


== CausesEdit ==
Pericarditis
Long term usage of cabergoline ingredient (dopamine agonists)
Between January 2004 and October 2012, 11 individuals taking benzodiazepines reported pericardial effusion to the FDA.
Viral infection (coxsackie virus)
Infection
Drug Eluting Stents
Inflammatory disorders, such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis and post myocardial infarction pericarditis (Dressler's syndrome)
Cancer that has spread to the pericardium
Trichinosis
Kidney failure with excessive blood levels of urea nitrogen
Minoxidil
Hypothyroidism
Heart surgery (postpericardotomy syndrome)
Clogged Chest tube after heart surgery, leading to retained blood complications


== DiagnosisEdit ==

It may be:
transudative (congestive heart failure, myxoedema, nephrotic syndrome),
exsudative (tuberculosis, spread from empyema)
hemorrhagic (trauma, rupture of aneurysms, malignant effusion).
malignant (due to fluid accumulation caused by metastasis)


== TreatmentEdit ==
Treatment depends on the underlying cause and the severity of the heart impairment. Pericardial effusion due to a viral infection usually goes away within a few weeks without treatment. Some pericardial effusions remain small and never need treatment. If the pericardial effusion is due to a condition such as lupus, treatment with anti-inflammatory medications may help. If the effusion is compromising heart function and causing cardiac tamponade, it will need to be drained, most commonly by a needle inserted through the chest wall and into the pericardial space called pericardiocentesis. A drainage tube is often left in place for several days. In some cases, surgical drainage may be required by cutting through the pericardium creating a pericardial window.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Pericardial Disease Cleveland Clinic Online Medical Reference