Quality control, or QC for short, is a process by which entities review the quality of all factors involved in production. ISO 9000 defines quality control as "A part of quality management focused on fulfilling quality requirements".
This approach places an emphasis on three aspects:
Elements such as controls, job management, defined and well managed processes, performance and integrity criteria, and identification of records
Competence, such as knowledge, skills, experience, and qualifications
Soft elements, such as personnel, integrity, confidence, organizational culture, motivation, team spirit, and quality relationships.
Controls include product inspection, where every product is examined visually, and often using a stereo microscope for fine detail before the product is sold into the external market. Inspectors will be provided with lists and descriptions of unacceptable product defects such as cracks or surface blemishes for example.
The quality of the outputs is at risk if any of these three aspects is deficient in any way.
Quality control emphasizes testing of products to uncover defects and reporting to management who make the decision to allow or deny product release, whereas quality assurance attempts to improve and stabilize production (and associated processes) to avoid, or at least minimize, issues which led to the defect(s) in the first place. For contract work, particularly work awarded by government agencies, quality control issues are among the top reasons for not renewing a contract.


== Notable approaches to quality controlEdit ==
There is a tendency for individual consultants and organizations to name their own unique approaches to quality control—a few of these have ended up in widespread use:


== Quality control in project managementEdit ==
In project management, quality control requires the project manager and the project team to inspect the accomplished work to ensure its alignment with the project scope. In practice, projects typically have a dedicated quality control team which focuses on this area.


== See alsoEdit ==
Analytical quality control
Corrective and preventative action (CAPA)
Eight dimensions of quality
First article inspection (FAI)
Good Automated Manufacturing Practice (GAMP)
Good manufacturing practice
Quality assurance
Quality management framework
Standard operating procedure (SOP)


== ReferencesEdit ==
 This article incorporates public domain material from the General Services Administration document "Federal Standard 1037C" (in support of MIL-STD-188).


== Further readingEdit ==
Radford, George S. (1922), The Control of Quality in Manufacturing, New York: Ronald Press Co., OCLC 1701274, retrieved 2013-11-16 
Shewhart, Walter A. (1931), Economic Control of Quality of Manufactured Product, New York: D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., OCLC 1045408 
Juran, Joseph M. (1951), Quality-Control Handbook, New York: McGraw-Hill, OCLC 1220529 
Western Electric Company (1956), Statistical Quality Control Handbook (1 ed.), Indianapolis, Indiana: Western Electric Co., OCLC 33858387 
Feigenbaum, Armand V. (1961), Total Quality Control, New York: McGraw-Hill, OCLC 567344 


== External linksEdit ==
ASTM quality control standards