Chartered Chemist (CChem) is a chartered status awarded by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) in the United Kingdom, the Royal Australian Chemical Institute (RACI) in Australia and the Institute of Chemistry Ceylon (IChemC), Sri Lanka.
Achieving chartered status in any profession denotes to the wider community a high level of specialised subject knowledge and professional competence. The award of the Chartered Chemist (CChem) designation recognises the experienced practising chemist who has demonstrated an in-depth knowledge of chemistry, significant personal achievements based upon chemistry, professionalism in the workplace and a commitment to maintaining technical expertise through continuing professional development.


== UK ==
In the United Kingdom, CChem candidates must meet the following requirements:
Be a Member or a Fellow of the RSC;
Hold a degree accredited by the RSC (or equivalent);
Show that the chemical knowledge and skills acquired from their education and training are essential for fulfilling the needs of their job;
Demonstrate development of 12 Professional Attributes.
The 12 professional attributes for Chartered Chemist in the UK are divided into five sections. The full list of attributes is:
A. Demonstrate and develop your knowledge and experience of chemistry as well as analytical and scientific skills.
Make significant personal contributions to key tasks in your employment area and understand fully the objectives of your work as they relate to the chemical sciences.
Demonstrate a high level of appropriate professional skills in the practice or advancement of the chemical sciences.
Develop your chemistry and other professional skills as required for work undertaken and career development.
Evaluate critically and draw conclusions from scientific and other data.
B. Exercise autonomy and professionalism in the workplace.
Demonstrate reliability, integrity and respect for confidentiality on work related and personal matters.
Plan, organise and implement work systematically and deliver results or improvements.
Demonstrate the ability to work as part of a team.
C. Communicate effectively and demonstrate influence in your role.
Demonstrate good communication skills by writing clear, concise and orderly documents and/or giving clear oral presentations.
Discuss work convincingly and objectively with colleagues, customers and others, responding appropriately to alternative views.
Exert effective influence.
D. Demonstrate an involvement in Environmental, Health and Safety matters and adhere to the relevant requirements relating to your role.
E. Demonstrate an interest in broader developments in chemical science and make a contribution to the profession outside your usual job remit.


== Australia ==
In Australia, Chartered Membership (MRACI CChem) is for:
Individuals who have been awarded with an Australian degree in chemistry or a chemistry-related discipline consisting of a minimum of three years academic study and have completed three years relevant experience working in a chemistry field.
Individuals who do not hold a chemistry degree but have a minimum of six years relevant experience working in a chemistry field.


== Sri Lanka ==
In Sri Lanka, every candidate for the award of the status of Chartered Chemist (C.Chem.) shall
C1 be more than 30 years of age
AND
C2 (a) have passed parts I and II of the Graduateship Examination conducted by the Institute of Chemistry, Ceylon.
OR (b) have obtained a Special Degree with Chemistry as the principal subject from a recognized university.
OR (c) have obtained a Bachelor’s Degree from a recognized university with an adequate coverage of Chemistry, acceptable to the Council and at least a Masters Degree in a branch of Chemistry from a recognized university.
OR (d) have obtained a Bachelor's Degree from a recognized university, with an adequate coverage of Chemistry and has had sufficient experience and/or attainments in the Chemical Sciences for the period of at least 10 years acceptable to the Council.
OR (f) have obtained any other equivalent qualifications acceptable to the Council,
AND
C3 (a) have passed Part II (C) of the Graduateship Examination conducted by the Institute
OR (b) have an equivalent attainment acceptable to the Council.
AND
C4 be able to demonstrate a high level of competence and professionalism in the practice of Chemistry and show his commitment to maintain his expertise for a period of at least 5 years subsequent to obtaining the qualifications and experience referred to in C 2 above.
AND
C5 Such a person should provide evidence of possessing one or more of the following at a level acceptable to the Council.
(a) has specialist chemical skills relevant to their practice
(b) has in– depth knowledge of the specialist areas of chemistry
(c) has responsibilities based upon chemistry and has made a significant personal contribution.
(d) demonstrates professionalism in the workplace
(e) has maintained chemical expertise through continuing professional development.


== See also ==
Chartered Physicist
Chartered Scientist
European Chemist


== References ==
RSC CChem information


== External links ==
Chartered Chemist title awarded by Institute of Chemistry, Sri Lanka.