A fastener is a hardware device that mechanically joins or affixes two or more objects together.
Fasteners can also be used to close a container such as a bag, a box, or an envelope; or they may involve keeping together the sides of an opening of flexible material, attaching a lid to a container, etc. There are also special-purpose closing devices, e.g. a bread clip. Fasteners used in these manners are often temporary, in that they may be fastened and unfastened repeatedly.
Some types of woodworking joints make use of separate internal reinforcements, such as dowels or biscuits, which in a sense can be considered fasteners within the scope of the joint system, although on their own they are not general purpose fasteners.
Furniture supplied in flat-pack form often uses cam dowels locked by cam locks, also known as conformat fasteners.
Items like a rope, string, wire (e.g. metal wire, possibly coated with plastic, or multiple parallel wires kept together by a plastic strip coating), cable, chain, or plastic wrap may be used to mechanically join objects; but are not generally categorized as fasteners because they have additional common uses. Likewise, hinges and springs may join objects together, but are ordinarily not considered fasteners because their primary purpose is to allow articulation rather than rigid affixment.
Other alternative methods of joining materials include: crimping, welding, soldering, brazing, taping, gluing, cementing, or the use of other adhesives. The use of force may also be used, such as with magnets, vacuum (like suction cups), or even friction.
There are three major steel fasteners used in industries: stainless steel, carbon steel, and alloy steel. The major grade used in stainless steel fasteners: 200 series, 300 series, and 400 series.


== Industry ==
In 2005, it is estimated that the United States fastener industry runs 350 manufacturing plants and employs 40,000 workers. The industry is strongly tied to the production of automobiles, aircraft, appliances, agricultural machinery, commercial construction, and infrastructure. More than 200 billion fasteners are used per year in the U.S., 26 billion of these by the automotive industry. The largest distributor of fasteners in North America is the Fastenal Company.


== Types ==

anchor bolt
batten
brass fastener
buckle
button
cable tie
captive fastener
clamp (or cramp)
hose clamp

clasps
lobster clasp

cleko
clips
circlip
hairpin clip
paper clip
terry clip

clutch
drawing pin (thumbtack)
flange
frog
grommet
hook-and-eye closure
hook and loop fastener
Velcro

latch
nail
pegs
clothespin
tent peg

PEM nut
pins
bowtie cotter pin
circle cotter
clevis fastener
cotter
dowel
linchpin
R-clip
split pin
spring pin
tapered pin

retaining rings
circlip
e-ring

rivet
rubber band (or bands of other materials)
screw anchor
snap fastener
staple
stitches
strap
threaded fastener
captive threaded fasteners
nut
screw
threaded insert
threaded rod

tie
toggle bolt
treasury tag
twist tie
wedge anchor
zipper


== See also ==
Safety wire
Taiwan International Fastener Show


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Parmley, Robert (1996). Standard Handbook of Fastening and Joining (3 ed.). McGraw Hill. ISBN 9780070485891. 


== External links ==
Fastener Quality Act
NASA Fastener Design Manual
A Guide to Identifying Various Bolts and Fasteners