Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind is a studio album by American singer/songwriter/producer Linda Ronstadt, released in October 1989 by Elektra Records. Produced by Peter Asher, the album features several duets with singer Aaron Neville—two of which earned Grammy Awards—and several songs written by Jimmy Webb.
The album sold over three million copies and was certified Triple Platinum in the United States alone. It was also a major success throughout the world.
In 2009, the album was taken out of print, twenty years after release.


== CompositionEdit ==
Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind is a diverse collection of songs in the rock, R&B, and pop genres. In addition, the album contains a few ballads, most notably Jimmy Webb's "Adios". Of the twelve tracks, Ronstadt elected to include four duets with Aaron Neville, of Neville Brothers fame. In addition, the album is noted for its big production values including backing musicians The Skywalker Symphony, Tower of Power horns, and the Oakland Interfaith Gospel Choir. There are also tracks by songwriters Jimmy Webb, Karla Bonoff, and an appearance of Brian Wilson, as back up singer and musical arranger on Ronstandt's fourteenth Top 10 Adult Contemporary single "Adios". The album's arrangers include Marty Paich, David Campbell, Jimmy Webb, Greg Adams, and Terrance Kelly.


== ReceptionEdit ==
Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind received critical acclaim and put Ronstadt back at top of the charts with the #1 gold-certified hit single "Don't Know Much", one of the duets with Neville. "Don't Know Much" and "All My Life", another chart-topping duet with Neville, won Grammy Awards in 1990 and 1991 respectively for Best Pop Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group. The album earned Ronstadt a Grammy nomination for Best Pop Vocal Performance, Female alongside Bette Midler, Bonnie Raitt, Gloria Estefan, and Paula Abdul. The album reached #7 on Billboard's album chart, spending well over a year on the chart, and selling over three million copies in the United States alone (certified triple platinum).
Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind stands as one of Ronstadt's three biggest selling studio albums of all-time in the United States (along with Simple Dreams and What's New). It was also one of her biggest selling albums worldwide, especially in Australia and the United Kingdom, selling over 100,000 copies (certified gold). This album is currently out of print.
When this album broke Billboard's Top 10, in late 1989, only one other female artist in music history had as many - or more - Top 10 albums: Barbra Streisand.


== Track listingEdit ==
"Still Within the Sound of My Voice" (Jimmy Webb) – 4:32
"Cry Like a Rainstorm" (Eric Kaz) – 3:36
"All My Life" (Karla Bonoff) – 3:36
"I Need You" (Paul Carrack, Nick Lowe, Martin Belmont) – 2:52
"Don't Know Much" (Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil, Tom Snow) – 3:35
"Adios" (Jimmy Webb) – 3:36
"Trouble Again" (Karla Bonoff, Kenny Edwards) – 3:19
"I Keep it Hid" (Jimmy Webb) – 3:58
"So Right, So Wrong" (Paul Carrack, Nick Lowe, Martin Belmont, J. E. Ceiling, James Eller) – 3:28
"Shattered" (Jimmy Webb) – 2:54
"When Something Is Wrong with My Baby" (Isaac Hayes, David Porter) – 3:52
"Goodbye My Friend" (Karla Bonoff) – 3:44


== PersonnelEdit ==
Music
Linda Ronstadt – vocals, background vocals
Aaron Neville – vocals
Jimmy Webb – piano, orchestral arrangement
Brian Wilson – arrangement, background vocals
Greg Adams – arrangement
David Campbell – orchestral arrangement, conductor
Terrance Kelly – orchestral arrangement, conductor, director
Marty Paich – orchestral arrangement, conductor
Greg Sudmeir – musical coordinator
Robbie Buchanan – keyboard, organ
Pavel Farkas – concert master
Don Grolnick – piano
William Smith – organ, keyboard
William D. "Smitty" Smith – electric piano
Andrew Gold – electric guitar, 12-string guitar
Mike Landau – electric guitar
Dean Parks – electric guitar
Larry Epstein – bass
David Hungate – bass
Lee Sklar – bass
Jeff Neighbor – bass
Russ Kunkel – drums
Carlos Vega – drums
Peter Asher – percussion
Mike Fisher – percussion
Rosemary Butler – background vocals
Jon Joyce – background vocals
Arnold McCuller – background vocals
Tower of Power – horns
Oakland Interfaith Gospel Choir
Skywalker Symphony Orchestra
Jeff Beal – musical coordinator, trumpet
Production
Peter Asher – producer
George Massenburg – recording and mixing
Frank Wolf – engineer
Bob Edwards – assistant engineer
Sharon Rice – assistant engineer
Mike Ross – assistant engineer
Jim Schelter – assistant engineer
Ivy Skoff – production coordination
Kosh – art direction, design
Robert Blakeman – photography
Janet Stark – personal assistant
Charles Barber - assistant to Marty Paich


== ChartsEdit ==
Album
Singles


== ReferencesEdit ==