CIPET or Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology is an autonomous institute under the department of chemicals and petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India.


== Introduction ==
CIPET headquarters was established at Chennai in 1968 with UNDP assistance. It receives funding support from the administration ministry, OPEC, UNIDO and the World Bank. It is believed that CIPET was founded by Brigadier. A F. Eugene. who is also the founder of MES. CIPET is an ISO 9001:2008 QMS, NABL, ISO/IEC 17020 accredited premier national Institution devoted to Academic, Technology Support & Research (ATR) activities for the growth of Polymer & allied industries in the country. CIPET operates on hub & spokes model with 23 locations spread across the length & breadth of the country. CIPET has 16 centres at Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Aurangabad, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Hajipur, Haldia, Imphal, Jaipur, Kochi, Lucknow, Mysore and Panipat. All the CIPET centres have state of art infrastructural facilities in the areas of Design, CAD/CAM/CAE, Tooling & Mould Manufacturing, Plastics processing, Testing and Quality control to cater to the needs of Polymer & allied industries in the country.
To provide qualified Human Resources to the industry, CIPET offers a blend of specialized academic Programs in the field of Plastics Engineering & Technology, be it Doctoral, Post Graduate, Undergraduate, Post Diploma or Diploma.
To upgrade the skill & technical competency of personnel employed in plastics industry, CIPET offers a wide range of short-duration, skill-cum-technology up-gradation Programs at all centers. The academic atmosphere in CIPET is a rare blend of modern-day technical skills with a traditional emphasis on imparting technical knowledge. The highly trained and motivated team of faculty at CIPET has achieved enviable excellence in manpower development.
Every year CIPET trains about 10000 students through long-term Programs and about 20000 trainees through short-term Programs with hands-on experience with the most modern sophisticated facilities in Design, CAD/CAM, Tool Room, Plastics Processing and the Plastics Testing & Quality Control. With a strong Alumni base of about 40,000 professionals across the world “CIPET” is indeed a recognized qualifying brand for supervisory and managerial manpower for the plastics industries.
CIPET renders Technology Support Services in Design, Tooling, Plastics Processing, and Testing & Quality Assurance in India and abroad. The Plastics Testing Centre (PTC) at CIPET is equipped with state of the art equipments and is recognized as one of the best plastics testing facilities in Asia. Several Central & State Govt organizations utilize CIPET’s expertise for consultancy services and as a third party inspection agency for plastics products. The biodegradable testing centre of CIPET is first of its kind in the country works jointly with European Bioplastics & International Biodegradable products Institute.
Envisioned to be a Global R&D Hub, CIPET has established two exclusive R & D wings at Chennai and Bhubaneswar. The Advanced Research School for Technology & Product Simulation - ARSTPS at Chennai focuses on Innovative Product Design for Automobile, Aerospace, Medical and Packaging Industries, product and Tool Design Conceptualization, E- Manufacturing of Prototypes, Rapid Prototyping for Lead Time Reduction, Reverse Engineering for Metal Substitution with Aesthetic and Ergonomical Approach. The Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM) at Bhubaneswar concentrates on Bio polymers, E Waste Recycling, Polymer Composites & Nanocomposites, Characterization of Blends, Alloys, and Fuel Cells. The Main Objectives of the R & D wings are to jointly collaborate R&D projects with the industry, and with Indian and Foreign Universities, to develop working Prototypes, to find Solutions to Engineering Problems, and to conduct Micro-analysis on behavior of Materials, Structures and Mechanical Systems.
CIPET has been recognised by Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) as a scientific and research organisation in the field of Plastics Engineering & Technology.
CIPET has signed a Memorandum of Agreement with several leading International Universities for faculty & student exchange Programs, bilateral R & D initiatives and collaborative research projects.
Through the funding support from administration ministry, OPEC, UNIDO and World Bank, CIPET is constantly / updating its civil and technical infrastructure facilities & capabilities named at continual process improvement, enhancing the knowledge of competency level of employees and delightful services to the valued customers. In its evaluation and appraisal, a World Bank report said, "CIPET has exceeded the objectives and expectations of the project in its implementation".
CIPET publishes serial publications like CIPET Times with coverage on latest technological developments, news and views about CIPET and industry trends. CIPET’s International Journal of Plastics Technology (IJPT) has international recognition as the Scientific Journal in the field of plastics technology with elite and eminent international Editorial board.
CIPET has established very good interaction with Regional & National Plastics Associations in India & it is a founder member of PIF.
CIPET’s place in the international arena is apparent from the prestigious assignments of Academic and Consultancy Services pouring in from all over the world.


== Academics ==
This is the only institute of this kind in India where all facilities like design, tooling, processing and testing of plastics are available under one roof. CIPET caters to the needs of plastic industries through manpower training, processing, design and CAD/CAM/CAE, testing, consultancy, advisory and developmental services.
To meet the needs of plastics conversion industry, CIPET has established extension centres in many states of the country. Each centre of the CIPET has been equipped with machinery in the area of mould/product design and development, CAD, plastic processing and testing/quality control. Apart from developing training manpower and technical services for plastics industries, each centre has been entrusted with a specific thrust area for development. centres
CIPET is conducting a range of Academic Programs varying level of entry qualification leading to Diploma, Post Diploma, PG Diploma, Degree, Post Graduate and Doctoral in accordance with ISO 9001:2008 QMS. The academic activities were categorized in to “4 TIER” as per the Human Resource requirement of Indian Plastics Industries and Sustainability of the Institute.
• Tier I – Doctoral, Postgraduate & undergraduate Programs are high-ended Programs at High Learning Centre.
• Tier II – Conventional CIPET’s Diploma, Post Diploma and Post Graduate Diploma Programs.
• Tier III – Industry specific Programs.
• Tier IV – Operator level Programs including non-conventional Programs at extended campus of CIPET.
Diploma, Post Diploma & Post Graduate Diploma Programs are being conducted in all the 16 centres.
Doctoral Programs are offered at Chennai, Bhubaneswar as per the prescribed norms & guidelines of the affiliating university, i.e. Anna University at Chennai and Biju Patnaik University of Technology and Utkal University at Bhubaneswar.
Undergraduate and Postgraduate Programs are offered at High Learning Centres viz. Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai, Lucknow & CBPST Kochi in affiliation with reputed universities of the respective states as under :
• CIPET Chennai - Anna University,Chennai.
• CIPET Bhubaneshwar - Biju Patnaik University of Technology, Rourkela.
• CIPET Lucknow - Gautam Buddh Technical University, Lucknow.
• CIPET Ahmedabad - Gujarat Technological University, Ahmedabad.
• CBPST Kochi - Cochin University of Science and Technology.
CIPET has signed MoU with renowned National and International Universities in order to remain at the forefront on the technological development in the field of plastics and allied areas and to share its experience with them. These collaborations include students and faculty exchange, joint research, product development, exchange of academic materials for training, etc..
The academic atmosphere at CIPET is a rare blend of modern-day technical skills with a traditional emphasis on imparting technical knowledge. The faculty as well as students who have qualified from CIPET Centres has always made the country proud through their outstanding achievements and leadership qualities. CIPET has demonstrated a fine example of interaction with the industry which are put in to the practice by trainees during course to feel them as working in an Industrial Environment with live Projects.
Academics Programs
Ph.D. Programs
Ph.D. Programs are offered at ARSTPS and LARPM - the two R&D wings of CIPET. ARSTPS focuses on Innovative Product Design, Tool Design, E-Manufacturing of Prototypes and Reverse Engineering. LARPM focuses on Composites, Nanocomposites, Polymer Blends & Alloys, Biopolymers, Fuel Cells and Recycling. Ph.D. degree is conferred from Anna University - Chennai / Biju Patnaik University of Technology - Rourkela / Utkal University - Bhubaneswar.

Postgraduate Degree Programs    

(i) M.E. / M.Tech. in Plastics Engineering / Technology
Course code : M.E. / M.Tech (PE/PT)* Duration : 2 years
Entry qualification : B.E./B.Tech./B.Sc., Engg. (4 years) in Mechanical / Chemical / Production / Polymer / Plastics Engineering / Technology (or) M.Sc. in Polymer Science / Chemistry with polymer specialization.
Affiliation : Chennai : Anna University Bhubaneswar : Biju Patnaik University of Technology Lucknow : Gautam Buddh Technical University Ahmedabad : Gujarat Technological University.
Course offered at Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai and Lucknow.
Selection & eligibility as per affiliating University norms.
For Admission at CIPET Chennai & Ahmedabad, please apply through respective University.
(ii) M.Tech. in Polymer Nano-Technology
Course code : M.Tech - PNT* Duration : 2 years
Entry qualification : B.E./B.Tech. (4 years) in Mechanical, Plastics Engineering / Technology / Polymer / Chemical (or) M.Sc., in Polymer Chemistry / Polymer Science / Physics / Chemistry with valid GATE score.
Affiliation : Biju Patnaik University of Technology, Bhubaneswar.
Course offered at CIPET - Bhubaneswar.
Selection and eligibility as per affiliating University norms.
(iii) Master of Engineering in CAD/CAM
Course code : M.E. (CAD/CAM)* Duration : 2 years
Entry qualification : B.E./B.Tech. (4 years) in Mechanical / Automobile / Manufacturing / Production / Industrial / Mechatronics / Marine / Aeronautical.
Affiliation : Anna University, Chennai.
Course offered at CIPET - Chennai.
Selection and eligibility as per University norms. Please apply through affiliating University.
(iv) M.Sc. Tech. (Material Science & Engineering)
Course code : M.Sc. Tech.* Duration : 5 years Maximum age : 21 years
Entry qualification : H.Sc/10+2 (Academic stream) with Maths, Physics & Chemistry.
Affiliation : Utkal University, Bhubaneswar.
Course offered at CIPET Bhubaneswar.
Selection and eligibility as per University norms.
(v) M.Sc. (Bio-Polymer Science)
Duration : 2 years
Entry qualification : Candidates with B.Sc. Degree in any branch with Chemistry as one of the subjects can apply. Candidate should have passed the qualifying examination with a minimum of 50%marks in the main and subsidiary subjects taken together.
Affiliation : Cochin University of Science and Technology.
Course offered at Centre for Biopolymer Science & Technology (A Unit of CIPET), Kochi
Selection and eligibility as per University norms.
(vi) M.Sc. (POLYMER SCIENCE)
Course code : M.Sc. (PS) Duration : 2 years
Entry qualification : B.Sc. (Science) degree with chemistry/industrial chemistry/polymer science/applied chemistry/industrial polymer chemistry/chemistry as one of the major subject.
Affiliation : CIPET - Ahmedabad : Gujarat University(GU), Ahmedabad CIPET - Bhubaneswar : Utkal University, Bhubaneswar
Course offered at CIPET - Ahmedabad, CIPET - Bhubaneswar.
Selection and eligibility as per University norms.

   Undergraduate Degree Programs         
        

(i) B.E. / B.Tech. in Plastics Engineering / Technology
Course code : B.E. / B.Tech (PE/PT)* Duration : 4 years Maximum age : 21 years
Entry qualification : H.Sc / 10+2 (Academic stream) with Maths, Physics & Chemistry.
Affiliation : Chennai : Anna University Bhubaneswar : Biju Patnaik University of Technology Lucknow : Gautam Buddh Technical University Ahmedabad : Gujarat Technological University.
Courses offered at Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai and Lucknow.
For admission to Undergraduate programs (B.E. / B.Tech.), please apply through respective affiliating University.
(ii) B.E. / B.Tech. in Manufacturing Engineering /Technology
Course code : B.E. / B.Tech. (ME / MT)* Duration : 4 years Maximum age : 21 years
Entry qualification : H.Sc / 10+2 (Academic stream) with Maths, Physics & Chemistry.
Affiliation : Chennai : Anna University Bhubaneswar : Biju Patnaik University of Technology Lucknow : Gautam Buddh Technical University Ahmedabad : Gujarat Technological University.
Courses offered at Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai and Lucknow.
For admission to Undergraduate programs (B.E. / B.Tech.), please apply through respective affiliating University.

   CIPET Programs (Diploma / Post Diploma / Postgraduate Diploma)    
        

(i) Diploma in Plastics Technology
Course code : DPT Duration : 3 years Maximum age : 20 years*
Entry qualification : X Std. with Maths, Science and English.
Age limit is relaxable up to 5 years for applicants from SC/ST category and from North Eastern Region in the case of Diploma / Post Diploma / Postgraduate.
(ii) Diploma in Plastics Mould Technology
Course code : DPMT Duration : 3 years Maximum age : 20 years*
Entry qualification : X Std. with Maths, Science and English.
Age limit is relaxable up to 5 years for applicants from SC/ST category and from North Eastern Region in the case of Diploma / Post Diploma / Postgraduate.
(iii) Post Diploma in Plastics Mould Design with CAD/CAM
Course code : PD-PMD with CAD/CAM Duration : 1½ years Maximum age : 25 years*
Entry qualification : 3 year Diploma in Mechanical, Plastics Technology, Tool/Production Engineering, Mechatronics, Automobile Engineering, Tool & Die Making, DPMT/DPT (CIPET) or equivalent.
Age limit is relaxable up to 5 years for applicants from SC/ST category and from North Eastern Region in the case of Diploma / Post Diploma / Postgraduate.
(iv) Postgraduate Diploma in Plastics Processing & Testing
Course code : PGD-PPT Duration : 1½ years Maximum age : 25 years*
Entry qualification : 3 year Degree in Science with Chemistry as one of the subjects.
Age limit is relaxable up to 5 years for applicants from SC/ST category and from North Eastern Region in the case of Diploma / Post Diploma / Postgraduate.


== Technology ==
Technology Support Services (TSS) is an integral part of the activities of CIPET and offers with high quality services to its customers in Tooling, Precision, Machining on CNC machines, Design and Manufacturing of Molds, Tools & Dies for manufacturing plastics products, CAD/CAM/CAE services, plastics product manufacturing through state-of-the-art Injection molding machines, Blow molding, PET, Stretch blow molding, Pipe and Film extrusion etc., Standardization, Testing and quality control for Plastics Materials and products, Pre delivery inspection (PDI) of plastics products like PVC and PE pipes, Woven sacks, Water storage tanks, Micro-irrigation equipments, Engineered bamboo boards, Polymer based composite doors etc.
Technology Support Services (TSS) is an integral part of the activities of CIPET and offers with high quality services to its customers in Tooling, Precision, Machining on CNC machines, Design and Manufacturing of Molds, Tools & Dies for manufacturing plastics products, CAD/CAM/CAE services, plastics product manufacturing through state-of-the-art Injection molding machines, Blow molding, PET, Stretch blow molding, Pipe and Film extrusion etc., Standardization, Testing and quality control for Plastics Materials and products, Pre delivery inspection (PDI) of plastics products like PVC and PE pipes, Woven sacks, Water storage tanks, Micro-irrigation equipments, Engineered bamboo boards, Polymer based composite doors etc. The organizations like Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd (HAL), Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), Electronic Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL) are the major Public Sectors & Govt. organizations recognized CIPET as their prospective vendor for precision tooling, mould & product development.
CIPET’s Plastics Testing Centre (PTC) is one of the best plastics testing facilities in Asia. CIPET's testing laboratories are accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing & Calibration Laboratories (NABL) as per ISO/IEC-17025 norms and also recognized by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for third party certification of plastic products as per various Indian standards.
CIPET’s expertise as third party inspection agency for plastics products are recognized by various Central & State Govt. organizations for Pre-Dispatch / Delivery Inspection of plastics & allied products. CIPET is the only Government organization having an accreditation as per the requirement of ISO/IEC: 17020 (General Criteria for the operation of various types of bodies performing inspection) Type – A Inspection body in the field of plastics.
The Institute is involved in collaborative programs at international and national levels in order to remain at the forefront on the technological development in the field of Plastics and allied areas and to share its experience with them. Some of the facets of these collaborations include students and faculty exchange, joint research, Product development, creation of electronic media and exchange of academic materials for training. In order to have close cooperation in research work, the Institute has signed Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with foreign universities, research institutes and industrial organizations.

  American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) International & CIPET signed an MoU to 

Promote communication between the two organizations. Promote knowledge of the standard development associated activities of each organization. Promote greater CIPET input and content into ASTM International plastics standards through greater CIPET and participation in the ASTM International standard development process, particularly in committee D20 on plastics. Promote acceptance and use of ASTM International standards.
On behalf of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) CIPET participate in Technical Committee (ISO –TC - 61) for formulating ISO Standards for International organization for standardization (ISO) exclusively in the field of plastics.


== Research ==
CIPET has successfully accomplished many R&D projects in different disciplines in the field of Plastics Engineering & Technology. CIPET has been recognized by Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR), Department of Science & Technology and other Government Departments / Organizations. In order to become a Global R&D Hub, 02 exclusive / dedicated R&D wings – (i) Advanced Research School for Technology & Product Simulation (ARSTPS) at CIPET, Chennai and (ii) Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM) at CIPET Bhubaneswar have been established for undertaking joint collaborative research projects with the Indian industries/universities/institutions and Foreign as well. Recently CIPET has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with world-renowned Universities / Institutions for collaborative research projects; faculty/ students exchange programs and formulation of standards and specifications.
• Unesp, Brazil • Shanghai University, China • Hannam University, South Korea • Kyung Hee University, South Korea • The Institute of Biopolymers and Chemical Fibres Lodz, Poland • The CIATEQ, A.C. Advanced Technology Center • University of Toronto (UoT), Canada • Michigan State University (MSU), East Lansing, USA • Penn State University, Pennsylvania, USA • University of Massachusetts (UMass), Lowell, USA • ASTM International, Philadelphia, USA • Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), USA • University of Guelph, Canada • European bio-plastics and international Biodegradable products Institute, Europe • European Higher Institute for the Enterprise and its Techniques (ISEETECH), Metz-France
The outcome of the research works carried out at R&D wings has helped the Indian plastic industries to use the new generation polymeric materials and also to introduce newer plastic products in all the key sectors of Indian Economy. CIPET will continue to focus and develop newer materials & products, import substitution mainly aimed at reducing the cost and improving the cost to performance balance which can certainly benefit plastics and allied industries.


== References ==