David Brown (born 12 July 1959) is an Australian meteorologist for Seven News.
A former weather presenter on Sunrise and Seven News in Melbourne, Currently Brown presents weather on Seven Morning News and Seven Afternoon News bulletins.


== Career ==
Brown graduated from Caulfield Institute of Technology (now part of Monash University) in 1981 with a B.App.Sc. degree. He then worked at the Bureau of Meteorology before becoming a weather presenter, initially on Network Ten.
David is one of few television weather presenters who is also a meteorologist. His Television carrier first began in the early 1990s at Channel Ten Melbourne (ATV10) as a local weather presenter. In 1995 he left Channel Ten to join rival station Channel Seven Melbourne (HSV7) where he began presenting the weather. He worked alongside famous Melbourne news presenters David Johnson, Jennifer Keyte and Peter Mitchell. While still presenting the local news in Melbourne in 2003 David was appointed national weather presenter on the Seven Networks new national news bulletin at 4.30.
In January 2008, Brown replaced Monique Wright on Sunrise taking the role as weather presenter. Brown stayed as weather presenter for 6 months on Sunrise, whilst continuing with his other duties at the Seven Network on the national Seven 4.30 News and Seven News Melbourne. Brown quit the role in July 2008, citing his heavy work load (having to work on three separate news programs throughout a 12-hour span). His replacement was Fifi Box.
In February 2013, Brown was appointed network meteorologist. In this position he will file weather reports for Sunrise, Sunday Night and Seven News. After months of speculation and 20 years in the job David was replaced as weeknight weather presenter on the Seven News Melbourne bulletin with Giaan Rooney. David still presents the weather on the networks Seven Afternoon News.
In July 2014, Brown began presenting the weather on Seven Morning News.


== Personal life ==
Brown is married with two daughters. He is a Carlton supporter.


== See also ==
Seven News
HSV (TV station)
David Johnston


== References ==

David Brown Bio at seven.com.au