Gangolihat is a small Himalayan hill town in the Pithoragarh district of Uttarakhand, India. It is tehsil and sub divisional headquarters of the district. Gangolihat is famous for its Shakti Peethas of Hat Kalika of goddess Kali. Nearby at 'Patal Bhubneshwar', underground caves are major tourist attraction. Also nearby are the tiny hill stations of Chaukori and Berinag.From Gangolihat Panchchuli peaks and Nanda Devi are clearly visible.


== Geography ==
Gangolihat is located at 29.48°N 80.05°E﻿ / 29.48; 80.05. It has an average elevation of 1,760 metres (5,773 feet). It is 78 km from Pithoragarh. The main town is at a hill top. The region is surrounded by two rivers Saryu and Ramganga. Which meet at Ghat at the foothill of the region. These two rivers make it like a Garland on the shoulders of mighty Himalaya. These two rivers gave the name to the region Gang (River in local dialect) + Awali (Garland) making Gangawali. Which became Gangoli later on. and Hat were the main markets/ gathering place for local people in past. Which made the name of Gangolihat.
Gangolihat is native of Pant Brahmins mainly. Along with Bhatt's(at Futsil&balatari)Pant's, Joshi's,Khati Gusain, Upreti's, Pathak's, Mahara, Negi's, Bisht, Rawal's, Verma's, Shah and Aryas are other major surnames found.


== Places of interest ==

Gangolihaat is famous for its ancient temples and underground caves. 'Haat Kalika', 'Ambika Dewaal', 'Chamunda Mandir', 'Vaishnavi Mandir' are some of the famous temples here. 'Vaishnavi Mandir' is a special one because from here one can clearly view the Himalayas. This temple is situated on a mountain that is called 'Shail Parvat', which is notable in Hindu holy books.
There are many beautiful underground caves in Gangolihaat. 'Patal Bhuvneshwar', 'Shailashwer Gufa' and 'Mukteshwar Gufa' are most notable ones. A new underground cave has been also found recently and that is called 'Bholeshwar Gufa' .The peak Bhurgottam near village Mallagrkha famous as place of Maharishi Bhrigu who was one of the seven great sages, the Saptarshis.
'Haat Kalika Mandir' was chosen by Adi Guru Sankaracharya for installation of on of the Shakti_Peethas. It is believed that the Original Goddes Kalika Mata, which supposed to be in West Bangal, shifted her place form Bangal to Gangolihat. This Temple is very famous all over the India, specially among Indian Armed Forces. Posthumous Param Veer Chakra award winner Capt. Bikram Batra was a great devotee of Goddess. The goddess Mahakali is the designated goddess of brave Kumaun Regiment which proved its unmatched bravery and patriotism during all major wars fought by India. Kumaun regiment has created an Army Rest House near the Temple for Army Personnel, who come Gangloihat to get the blessing of Goddess.
There are historical monuments made during 8-11th century near the famous temple. Which is a site preserved by Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). It depicts the nervelessness of the artistic creation at that time.
The highest peak in the range, Lankeshwar is a great picnic place. The view of greenery rich valleys of Kumaun Himalayas from this hilltop is memorable and heavenly.


== References ==


== External links ==