Tax law is an area of legal study dealing with the constitutional, common-law, statutory, tax treaty, and regulatory rules that constitute the law applicable to taxation.


== Major issuesEdit ==
Primary taxation issues facing the governments world over include;
taxes on income and wealth (or estates)
taxation of capital gains
Ecotax (short for Ecological taxation) refers to taxes intended to promote environmentally friendly activities via economic incentives.


== Tax education from law schoolsEdit ==
In law schools, "tax law" is a sub-discipline and area of specialist study. Tax law specialists are often employed in consultative roles, and may also be involved in litigation. Many U.S. law schools require about 30 semester credit hours of required courses and approximately 60 hours or more of electives. Law students pick and choose available courses on which to focus before graduation with the J.D. degree in the United States. This freedom allows law students to take many tax courses such as federal taxation, estate and gift tax, and estates and successions before completing the Juris Doctor and taking the bar exam in a particular U.S. state.
There are many Master of Laws (LL.M) programs currently being offered in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, Netherlands etc. Many of these programs offer the opportunity to focus on domestic and international taxation. In the United States, most LL.M. programs require that the candidate be a graduate of an American Bar Association-accredited law school. In other countries a graduate law degree is sufficient for admission to LL.M. in Taxation law programs.


== Taxation by jurisdictionEdit ==
Americas
Taxation in Colombia
Taxation in the British Virgin Islands
Taxation in Canada
Taxation in the United States
Europe
Taxation in the European Union
Taxation in France
Taxation in Germany
Taxation in Portugal
Taxes in Spain
Taxation in Bulgaria
Taxation in Poland
Taxation in the Republic of Ireland
Taxation in Russia
Taxation in the United Kingdom
Taxation in the Netherlands
Asia
Taxation in Australia
Taxation in India
Taxation in Iran
Taxation in China
Taxation in the Palestinian territories
Taxation in the People's Republic of China


== See alsoEdit ==
Corporate law
Corporate tax