Umdloti, (also known as Umdloti Beach), is a small resort town on the KwaZulu-Natal North Coast, South Africa that is situated at the mouth of the Mdloti River north of Durban and now forms part of eThekwini, the Greater Durban Metropolitan Municipality. The name Mdloti is the Zulu word for a species of wild tobacco that grows here.
Umdloti has a permanent population of around 3,000 people but can increase by as much as tenfold during the Christmas and Easter holiday season. Due to Umdloti's single access road from the M4/N2 interchanges, the topography, the fact that North and South Beach Roads are both cul-de-sac's and limited public parking,the repercussions of the seasonal holidaymaker influx results in traffic congestion and frequent gridlock, mainly at year-end.
Umdloti real estate consists of full title, free-standing homes, mainly on the South Beach and sectional title apartments, located mostly on North Beach. Much of the latter is owned by non-residents as holiday homes or rental properties.
Umdloti, although still a small, peaceful town is situated ten kilometers north of Umhlanga Rocks. It has two commercial centres, a Post Office and several restaurants. The town is split in two levels by an ancient, mature sand-dune, creating an upper and lower area of the town. A natural Rock pool by the beach creates a safe swimming area. Its southern boundary consists of natural, sub-tropical bush and sugar cane fields. To the north, the Umdloti River and estuary. To the West, it abuts natural bush and behind that, the Tongaat-Hulett Sugar's Bellamont Estate.
Umdloti is famous for dolphins that swim very close to the beach early every morning and July to November is a very good time for Whale watching when whales are seen from the beach.


== References ==


== External links ==
Umdloti official website with pages describing: climate and geography, nature and wildlife, diving spots, a whale register, tide tables, the activities of the Umdloti Conservancy, accommodation, restaurants, shops and services.
[1] Generally shy' green mamba bites tourist
Umdloti North Beach A local hotspot for enjoying cocktails and ocean views
Umdloti life-Stile A wonderful place to enjoy the summer visit Umdloti