The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of fifty of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Gold and Silver versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== WobbuffetEdit ==
Wobbuffet (ソーナンス, Sōnansu), known as the Patient Pokémon and known as Sonans in Japan, is a stiff, blue, balloon-shaped Pokémon with clenched eyes, a pair of stubby feet and a black tail that looks like it has eyes. In the Japanese Pokémon anime and movies, Wobbuffet is often seen putting a hand to its forehead and shouting "Soooooonansu!" (which was translated also for the English adaptation, where it says "Woooooobbuffet!"). It is voiced by Yuji Ueda in Japan, and Kayzie Rogers in the English dub.
Wobbuffet hates light and shock, so it lives in the quiet darkness of caves and only comes out at night. If attacked, it inflates its body to bolster its ability to counter-attack using the moves Counter and Mirror Coat, rather than offensive battling like most other Pokémon, for it will not attack on its own. It does nothing but endure attacks in this fashion, suggesting Wobbuffet either has an inability to tolerate aggressive behavior on its part, or it is simply built to withstand attacks. However, it will not endure an attack on its valued, sensitive tail. When that happens, the Pokémon will try to take the foe with it using Destiny Bond. To keep its pitch-black tail hidden from the sight of potential attackers, it lives in black caves and atmospheres as described above. According to GamesRadar, Wobbuffet is "based on a Japanese comedian verbatim". As of Generation IV, the female Wobbuffet appears to have lipstick on her lips while the male does not.
In the Pokémon anime, Jessie obtained a male Wobbuffet after she accidentally exchanged her Lickitung for it in the episode Tricks of the Trade, and it became a recurring Pokémon in the series. Wobbuffet has a habit of popping out of its Poké Ball at inopportune times without being called, including at the end of Team Rocket's motto.
In the Super Smash Bros. series, Wobbuffet is a Pokémon summon, using Counter to attack players (regardless of who threw the Poké Ball).


== GirafarigEdit ==
Girafarig (キリンリキ, Kirinriki) is a herbivore that resembles a giraffe. It is yellow with dark brown spots for the front half, while the back half is dark brown with yellow spots. The back section is smaller on the females. It feeds off plant life in the area and uses its long prehensile tongue to get branches that are out of reach, similar to a real giraffe. Most notably, the end of Girafarig's tail has a simplistic head. The head has a small brain of its own, but can only rely on instinct. If a person gets near the head, it reacts to the person's scent and bites. The head doesn't need to sleep, so it watches over its surroundings twenty four hours a day. Girafarig's name is a palindrome in both English and Japanese, although the Japanese name's palindromic nature is not evident in Romanized form.
Girafarig's first anime appearance was in The Psychic Sidekicks where it was owned by a girl named Cherry. It later reappeared in the Diamond and Pearl series in the episode Gone With the Windworks!, where it was under the ownership of Lyra. It has also appeared in Spell of the Unown.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Girafarig first appears in Volume 8, where it is controlled by Team Rocket.
IGN's Jack DeVries included Girafarig on his list of "Do Not Want" Pokémon. He joked that "his mom was a giraffe and his dad was a Chain Chomp from Super Mario Bros 3" and that he hasn't "been this weirded out since I saw that show about that man in China with the extra face growing out of the side of his real face". IGN's Pokémon Chick wrote that was awesome for having a "posterior sports a second, wickedly fanged head" and that "the first time that thing's arse hissed at me in Pokémon Stadium 2 I must admit I was a tad intimidated". She also made a comparison of its second head to the Chain Chomp and wrote "I do heartily recommend that you give Girafarig a chance". GamePro‍ '​s McKinley Noble wrote that Girafarig was the representative "circus freak" Pokémon for Gold and Silver. Destructoid's Jim Sterling listed Girafarig as one of the six things that bothers him about Pokémon and wrote about it "I mean honestly ... what the Hell?".


== PinecoEdit ==
Pineco (クヌギダマ, Kunugidama) is a bagworm that resembles a pine cone in appearance. It is usually inactive, hanging from forest trees, where it waits for its prey of small flying insects to come to it. Pineco are capable of spitting out a sticky liquid that hardens when exposed to air. This has multiple uses, an example being Pineco using it to glue pieces of bark to themselves for protection, making them bigger and their hide more durable, much like the bagworm in real life. Like Voltorb and Electrode, Pineco explodes when startled or annoyed.
In the Pokémon anime, Brock catches a Pineco in the episode Goin' Apricorn! to save it from Jessie's Arbok. It often explodes, no matter what its mood is, but it loses this habit later on when it evolves into a Forretress.


== ForretressEdit ==
Forretress (フォレトス, Foretosu) is a bagworm as classified by the Pokédex, but its true appearance is unknown because it is always hidden inside a steel shell, the only visible part inside being its eyes. The shell itself has two parts: inner and outer. The inner shell is brick red and features four protrusions that look like small cannons. The outer shell is gray and pockmarked, like the surface of the moon. Forretress opens its shell only when it is catching prey, but it does so at such a quick pace that it is impossible to discern the nature of what lies inside, much less attack it while it is unprotected. Forretress can also shoot out bits of the shell for offensive purposes.
In the Pokémon anime, Brock's Pineco evolves into a Forretress in the episode Entei At Your Own Risk. It is notable for being the only Pokémon he brought with him to Hoenn, and he has since left it at the gym in his hometown of Pewter City.


== DunsparceEdit ==
Dunsparce (ノコッチ, Nokocchi) is a land snake based on the tsuchinoko, a legendary snake-like cryptid from Japan. It has a yellow hourglass-shaped body, two tiny wings on its sides, a drill for a tail, and two spikes under its chin. Its underbelly is blue, as are the markings on its back. Dunsparce lives in caves and deep underground in nests of complex design. Its rudimentary wings enable it to hover above the ground, providing it with an alternate method of motion besides crawling. Despite these wings and bug-like appearance, Dunsparce is solely a Normal-type Pokémon.
In Pokémon Gold and Silver, the debut games of Dunsparce, this Pokémon was rarely found on a normal basis (hence the word sparse in its name). However, occasionally a swarm of Dunsparce would appear in Dunsparce's normal habitat, raising its appearance rate from under 10% to over 50%.
A GamesRadar staff member chose Dunsparce as one of his favorite Pokémon that is not good competitively; he added that training it was a "huge waste of time". He felt it should have been given an evolution. Nevertheless, Dunsparce's Serene Grace ability paired with flinching moves like Headbutt, Rock Slide, and Bite allows it to win matches purely by luck.


== GligarEdit ==
Gligar (グライガー, Guraigā, Gliger in original Japanese language versions) is a purple winged scorpion that is able to glide from a leathery membrane it has that functions as wings. Gligar makes its home on steep cliffs. When it spots prey, it lets go of the cliff's face, spreads its wings and glides silently and effortlessly towards its target, as if it were sliding. This catches its victim by surprise when it flies straight to its face. It then uses its claws and pincers to secure its hold on the opponent's face and injects it with poison from its tail barb to paralyze the prey. It is the first Flying-type Pokémon that is unaffected by Electric-type attacks. In the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series, its new evolved form has been introduced as Gliscor.
In the anime episode entitled "Riding the Winds of Change", Ash Ketchum caught a Gligar. It has since evolved into a Gliscor.


== SteelixEdit ==
Steelix (ハガネール, Haganēru) is a large serpentine Pokémon that has a steel body with several spikes and a large jaw. The male has two spikes on each side of its jaw while the female only has one spike on each side. It is said that an Onix evolves into Steelix when one lives to be 100 or more, then the pressures exercised on its stone body become so high that it is compressed into a composition harder than diamond, although evolution is actually achieved by attaching a Metal Coat to Onix and trading it. Steelix continues to burrow underground like it did as an Onix, but it reaches far greater depths, reaching records of up to 0.6 miles (900 metres) while heading for the Earth's core.
IGN named Steelix the 80th best Pokémon species by IGN users. IGN's Audrey Blake wrote that while she was skeptical of the idea of Onix having an evolution due to her affinity to it (particularly the character Brock's Onix in the anime) and a worry that she wouldn't like it as well. She eventually found it to be "definitely good enough to accept as a legitimate evolution" though not "quite as classic as good ole Onix". IGN's Pokémon Chick stated that it was a favourite among trainers due to its high defense. She later wrote that it was "horrible-yet-grossly-overused-anyway". Author Ash Dekirk wrote that Steelix resembles a "great wurm" of steel.


== SnubbullEdit ==
Snubbull (ブルー, Burū, Bull) is a pink, blue spotted, bipedal canine that resembles a bulldog. It was a normal type prior to Gen VI where it was changed to the newly introduced fairy type. Despite its rather intimidating appearance, Snubbull has a playful and affectionate personality, similar to the real-life bulldog, which makes it a popular pet among the women of the Pokémon world. Another of Snubbull's personality traits is its cowardice, which it tries to hide behind a gruff exterior. If it feels threatened, Snubbull can bare its fangs and make its appearance intentionally intimidating to terrorize smaller and/or weaker Pokémon into running away. However, Snubbull has also been observed to be a little sad at driving away potential friends like this.
GamesRadar listed Snubbull on their list of "The most disturbing Pokemon of all time", citing the way its Pokédex entry gives the idea of a "Poke-harem".


== GranbullEdit ==
Granbull (グランブル, Guranburu) is a large, purple, bipedal bulldog with a pair of imposing, heavy fangs protruding from its lower jaw. The lower jaw is quite developed and, taken together with the fangs, heavy enough that Granbull must constantly decide between tipping its head back for balance and tilting its head down for decreased energy exertion. As its large mouth and fangs are built specifically for offense, Granbull can bite with a crushing amount of power. Granbull's vicious appearance is a natural intimidation tactic meant to discourage any other Pokémon from assaulting it. In spite of its appearance, however, it is rather timid and easily spooked, and it only defends itself in retaliation to an assault upon it. When it is attacked by another Pokémon in the wild, Granbull flails about with its limbs to ward off its attacker.
GamesRadar described Gardevoir and Granbull as the equivalent of Beauty and the Beast and also noted that his underbite is comparable to that of Bruce Springsteen's.


== QwilfishEdit ==
Qwilfish (ハリーセン, Harīsen) is a porcupinefish-like fish that has a round body with many toxin-containing spikes and a teardrop-shaped tail. The spikes give it trouble swimming, but it also has defensive measures against predators. Qwilfish can swallow large quantities of water in very short notice, causing itself to inflate to a much larger size, which it uses to intimidate larger opponents. If the opponent isn't scared, Qwilfish uses the pressure of the water it swallowed to shoot out its toxic spikes at, thus weakening, the opponent.
In the anime, Qwilfish made its first appearance in Dueling Heroes, owned by Harrison. Dorian, the leader of the unofficial Coastline Gym featured in Just Add Water, owns a Qwilfish. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a swarm of Qwilfish appeared in Volume 10, angered by pollution that occurred as a result of an accident that occurred during the construction of the Battle Tower.


== ScizorEdit ==

Scizor (ハッサム, Hassamu, Hassamu A play on the word for scissors in Japanese, "はさみ「Hasami」", in original Japanese language versions) is a human-size mantis similar to its evolutionary predecessor Scyther, with a thick, metallic red exoskeleton and crab-like claws. It is tougher and stronger than Scyther, but has lost its predecessor's speed and ability to fly. Instead, it spreads its wings to cool off, and flaps them very rapidly to heat up, or to blow air to cool itself off. The eye-like markings on its claws enable it to confuse prey by pretending to have three heads. Its demeanor changes, as well. While Scyther is a mantis-like predator, striking fast and simply evading potential pursuers, Scizor is more crab-like, with a conservative, defensive demeanor, in keeping with its greater defensive ability and lesser speed. Once it engages its foe, either in the wild or at the direction of a Pokémon Trainer in a Pokémon battle, however, it behaves more like Scyther, striking quickly with its powerful claws, raking more than pinching, and relying on its startling agility to evade attacks. Scizor is unique in that it has the same base stat total as its pre-evolution Scyther.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness Scizor is a famous explorer who is captured by Froslass in ice for several decades. The player travels to Crevice Cave to defeat Froslass and frees Scizor, who bestows the Secret Rank upon the player's team in gratitude. Both Scyther and Scizor are NPCs in PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure and its sequel, PokéPark 2: Wonders Beyond. Scizor appears from a Poké Ball in Super Smash Bros. Melee, flying around the stage and attacking anybody it comes into contact with.
In the anime, Scizor was first seen under the ownership of a trainer named Shingo who thought he could always predict the outcome of a match by the database on his computer in Wired For Battle. The Iron-Masked Marauder used a Scizor to retrieve Celebi in Celebi: Voice of the Forest. Gary Oak used a Scizor against Ash in Can't Beat the Heat!. In A Judgment Brawl, Katie used a Scizor to battle Ash's Swellow during the Hoenn League, and lost.
GamesRadar wrote that Scyther continued to look fierce even after its evolution into Scizor. GamesRadar commented that while Scyther was cool, its evolution Scizor was even cooler. Another editor called it a "hybrid of a mantis and a gundam" citing its "sleek exterior, powerful claws, and tender caress". IGN noted their various weakness, though described them as "so popular it's sickening" and praised its design, naming Scyther the best of the Bug-type Pokémon to appear in Pokémon Red and Blue and made stronger with its evolved form. IGN editor PokemonOfTheDayHunk stated that Scizor is an overused character, and "if you want to be original, stay away from this guy." 1UP.com called Scizor one of their favourite Pokémon which got much better in Diamond and Pearl. They also described it as the "vogue Pokémon" of competitive Pokémon battling. In a poll conducted by IGN, it was voted as the 19th best Pokémon, where the staff called it "one of the coolest Pokémon to come out of Generation II", also stating that "Scyther is already one of the coolest Pokémon in the game".


== ShuckleEdit ==
Shuckle (ツボツボ, Tsubotsubo) resembles a scale insect. Its soft yellow body has four legs and is covered by a hard, vase-like red shell which has eight openings for Shuckle to stick its head and four appendages out of. It makes its home amid rocks, withdrawing into its rock-like shell and hiding among, under or within them. Shuckle employs a fluid secreted by its toes to dissolve rocks and carve them in a shape fit for its nest, the fluids are also occasionally used offensively against enemy Pokémon. Shuckle's diet consists of berries, which it stores inside its shell to eat later. If stored long enough, the berries will eventually decompose and mix with Shuckle's natural fluids to form a viscous liquid that makes a healing beverage aptly called "Berry Juice", which restores 20 HP. It also notably has the best Defense and Special Defense of any Pokémon in the game, though it has low HP and its offensive stats are worse than Magikarp's. In the anime, Butch of the higher Team Rocket owns a Shuckle. Shuckle is also able to do the most damage in one move than any pokemon.


== HeracrossEdit ==
Heracross (ヘラクロス, Herakurosu, Heracros in original Japanese language versions) is a large, blue, winged bipedal beetle. It has a capsule-shaped thorax similar to Pinsir's, a pair of yellow eyes and two clawed arms and feet. Growing from its head is a large T-shaped horn, which is flanked on either side by a smaller antenna. As of Pokémon X and Y Heracross is capable of Mega Evolving during this it gains a temporary form that is much bulkier than its previous one. It also gains larger forearms and horns that resemble those of a Hercules Beetle. Heracross is a powerful but docile Pokémon. Its natural habitat is forests and its diet consists of tree sap, nectar and honey. Its strength is such that it can topple large trees if it so wished. Heracross's main weapon is its large horn, of which it is particularly proud. However, it only uses it in the wild to deter its foes, not hurt them.
In the Pokémon anime, Ash catches a Heracross in the episode A Sappy Ending. The Heracross is powerful, but also is distracted by sap, to the point where it tries to feed off the nectar of Ash's Bulbasaur's flower bulb when Bulbasaur is in sight, often forcing Bulbasaur to use Vine Whip to stop Heracross. It is currently at Professor Oak's lab and is voiced by Katsuyuki Konishi in both the Japanese- and English-language versions of the anime.


== SneaselEdit ==
Sneasel (ニューラ, Nyūra) is a nocturnal Pokémon that lives in caves and mountain forests. Its English name is a portmanteau of the words sneak and weasel. Sneasel is a deep blue-gray and has a golden jewel on its forehead and chest, and its claws are white. These claws are dangerously sharp, extremely durable, and are used for attacking. It hunts under the cover of chilly darkness, which allows it to sneak up on foes or lost prey. It also steals and eats eggs from nests. If the nest is guarded by a parent Pokémon, Sneasel scares the Pokémon away. It evolves into Weavile by leveling it up with Razor Claw at night.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== TeddiursaEdit ==
Teddiursa (ヒメグマ, Himeguma) is a bear cub, resembling a teddy bear more than a real bear. Teddiursa have a crescent mark on their forehead, which grows (both in thickness and in circumference) as the Pokémon ages. Once the crescent fully closes into a circle, the Teddiursa is ready to evolve into an Ursaring. Teddiursa, although an omnivore, has a diet that almost exclusively consists of honey. It makes its own honey out of fruit and pollen from Beedrill. It lets the honey soak in its paws, making it often lick its paws.
Teddiursa has appeared many times in the anime. Molly Hale used an illusion of a Teddiursa to battle Brock in Spell of the Unown. She is seen with a real one at the end of the movie. Teddiursa's first major appearance was in UnBEARable. This Teddiursa was a thief by pretending to be cute to humans to steal their food and blame it on their Pokémon. Ultimately it evolved into Ursaring at the end of the episode. A Teddiursa is one of the best friends of the Pichu Brothers in Pichu Bros.: Party Panic. A Teddiursa appeared in Going For A Spinda, disguised as a Spinda by Team Rocket and tied up in order to lure a Spinda to them, but instead its Ursaring parent came and blasted them off.


== UrsaringEdit ==
Ursaring (リングマ, Ringuma) is a large (although arboreal) bear with a yellow ring on its stomach. Ursaring eats food obtained from digging deep underground as well as berries from trees. Ursaring can hibernate through an entire winter without any food. Ursaring's sense of smell is among the most developed of all Pokémon; it can detect subtle differences in scents. For this reason, Ursaring is sometimes used by police in the Pokémon universe, both as a strong enforcer, and as an explosive-sniffing Pokémon. If criminals are hiding in trees, it can use its claws to cut down the tree. It is based on a grizzly bear and possibly a sun bear.
Its Japanese name, "Ringuma", originates from "ring" (ringu) and "bear" (kuma). In the anime, Ursaring is caught by Paul, after it is angered by Turtwig.


== SlugmaEdit ==
Slugma (マグマッグ, Magumaggu, Magmag in original Japanese language versions) is a diurnal slug-like Pokémon made of lava. It usually lives in areas of great heat, because it requires heat to live. It can only be motionless for an amount of time if it stays near heated areas. If it strays from a heated area, it must remain in constant motion, or its skin will harden. If it stops moving in this case, it will die slowly from starvation. Despite this, Slugma can learn the move Harden.
Slugma made its debut in the anime as one of Macey's Pokémon in Tie One On! and was used in her battle against Ash in the Silver Conference. At the end of the episode it had evolved into Magcargo. Flannery had two Slugma named Mag and Meg, one of which evolved to Magcargo in Poetry Commotion!. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a trio of Slugma first appeared in Volume 10. Professor Oak tried to capture them at the beginning of the volume, but failed. The Slugma later appeared outside Earl's Pokémon Academy at Violet City where they were captured by Crystal. Mack uses his Slugma to create illusions by generating waves of distorted air via heat, forcing targets to relive their worst memories.


== MagcargoEdit ==
Magcargo (マグカルゴ, Magukarugo, Magcargot in original Japanese language versions) is a snail composed of magma with a shell on its back. The shell is actually a thin outgrowth of its skin that hardened due to cooling of the air, in spite of the fact that it lives in the heat of volcanic craters. The shell is brittle and fragile enough that touching it will cause it to break and crumble, though Magcargo “grows” back its shell passively in a short amount of time. Magcargo has a body temperature of approximately 18,000 degrees Fahrenheit. This temperature would not be attainable in the real world, since even rhenium and tungsten vaporize at much lower temperatures. Since Magcargo is composed of molten lava, when traveling at its slow pace it leaves parts of its continually hardening body on the ground behind it, thus decreasing its physical size. To lose too much of its mass is potentially deadly, so Magcargo routinely restores its size and vitality by dipping its body into volcanic pools of magma.


== SwinubEdit ==
Swinub (ウリムー, Urimū) is a pig covered in brown fur with dark brown stripes, and is found in icy areas. It roots around with its nose to find food, its favorite being a certain mushroom that grows under dead grass. Swinub's nose is so tough that even the frozen ground poses no problem. Occasionally, it will find hot springs while rooting around in the ground.
Swinub is notable for being the first Ice-type in the National Dex Listing that evolves into another Ice-type in the same generation, as all other Ice-types before Swinub either evolve from pure Water-types (Dewgong and Cloyster, which evolve from pure Water-types Seel and Shellder, respectively) do not evolve into or from anything (Lapras and Articuno) or have relatives in different generations (Jynx and Sneasel).
In the anime, Dawn acquires a Swinub she met in Mr. Backlot's garden, after it saved her and the group's Pokémon from Team Rocket. This Swinub eventually evolved into a Piloswine and then into a Mamoswine two episodes later. Now at this stage, it has acquired gigantic strength, but has also become very aggressive towards Dawn and her Pokémon. Dawn is still eager to train it, however. Noticed in the anime, Swinub has an enormous appetite.


== PiloswineEdit ==
Piloswine (イノムー, Inomū, Inomoo in original Japanese language versions) has elements of wild boars and mammoths, but is most similar to muskox. Piloswine thrives in cold climates. It has adapted to such inhospitable environments; its thick, shaggy fur which covers its body almost completely shields it against the low temperature, while its rugged hooves provide traction on slippery and frictionless ice surfaces. Piloswine has difficulty seeing because the fur covers its eyes, but it compensates for that by being extremely sensitive to sound. If an ill-meaning individual makes an incriminating noise, Piloswine will home in on the threat and charge at it repeatedly, since it can't see clear enough to tell when the danger has been neutralized.
In the game and anime, Pryce, Gym Leader of Mahogany Town, uses a Piloswine as his main signature Ice-type Pokémon.


== CorsolaEdit ==
Corsola (サニーゴ, Sanīgo, Saniigo in original Japanese language versions) is composed of a pink coral-like substance. It has a small face and a white underbelly. In addition to the coral outgrowths (also described as branches) situated all over the upper half of its body, Corsola also has a growth like a horn on its head, and that is considered its natural armament when facing underwater predators. They can also regenerate the branches. The branches serve to supply Corsola with nutrients by absorbing them from wherever there is clean water. The branches are amazingly expendable; if any branch breaks off, Corsola can grow it back over the period of one night (compare with Staryu). However, this regenerative ability is undermined by Corsola’s inability to live in polluted water. If the sea is polluted, Corsola’s branches become discolored and soon crumble away, where soon after the Pokémon will die. Corsola prefers to live wherever the seas are warm, so is a common sight near the shorelines during summer. Many live in the clean, and presumably warm, seas of the south.
In the Pokémon anime, Misty caught a Corsola in the episode A Corsola Caper, and has owned it ever since. It almost immediately became Misty's primary battling Pokémon, displaying surprisingly strong offensive abilities (in one case, knocking out a Gyarados with a single attack) in addition to the defensive power for which the species is best known.


== RemoraidEdit ==
Remoraid (テッポウオ, Teppouo in original Japanese language versions) is a remora-based suckerfish that scavenges for food and has a somewhat symbiotic relationship with Mantine. Remoraid will attach itself to the underbelly of Mantine with its dorsal fin, eating scraps of food that Mantine drops as well as the parasites on them that causes them to itch. In return, the Mantine helps defend the Remoraid from enemies. When not scavenging for food, Remoraid will strike down its own prey with precise accuracy using fast streams of airborne water, which Remoraid shoots from its mouth using abdominal muscles. Remoraid can move faster through the water by blasting water from its mouth in the opposite direction of where it intends to move. Despite being based on a fish, strangely enough it evolves into Octillery, a Pokémon based on an Octopus which is a mollusc. Its appearance has no resemblance to Remoraid whatsoever which makes Remoraid one of the few Pokémon to have an evolve from that is completely different from itself. Though the evolution may be a reference to suction cups; Remoraid having one as a dorsal fin and evolving into Octillery to have many.
Remoraid is based on the Gunfish enemy from the game Pulseman, a video game created by Game Freak years before Pokémon.
In the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series, it must be present in the player's party for Mantyke to evolve into Mantine.


== OctilleryEdit ==
Octillery (オクタン, Okutan, Okutan in original Japanese language versions) resembles a combination of an octopus and a tank. Its name is a portmanteau of the words "octopus" and "artillery". This is reflected in its abilities, including squirting ink as a means of self-defense. Also, like many octopode, Octillery can move about by squirting pressurized water from its mouth. Octillery is a carnivore; they catch fish with their tentacles, and kill (and afterwards eat) it by smashing the rocky protrusions on its head into its opponent's skull. Octillery is a nesting creature, in that it sleeps in burrows it prepares; however, its nests are temporary structures only, and it rarely uses the same nest two nights in a row. Despite being an evolved form of Remoraid, it shares no resemblance to it other than its behavior (using its suction cups to suckle) and being based on a weapon. It is known for its signature move Octozooka.
Octillery has been the focus of a few promotional events. In 2007, Japanese Pokémon Centers gave out headbands and stickers to high leveled Octillery owners.


== DelibirdEdit ==
Delibird (デリバード, Deribādo in original Japanese language versions) resembles the rockhopper penguin, or possibly a snowy owl. The name is a portmanteau of the words delivery, due to its profession as a messenger, and bird. It has red and white plumage and is always pictured carrying a sack with it, giving it a Santa Claus-like impression, although its "sack" is actually a long wavery tail, like a ribbon. Delibird is said to make its home at the edge of steep cliffs. It spends all day searching for food, which it stores in its sack/tail and brings back to its chicks. Delibird are known to save the lives of many lost and starved mountaineers by sharing their food with them. A Delibird under attack will fling its stored food at the opponent as a projectile weapon.
In the video games, Delibird is a relatively rare Pokémon; it appears in icy caves, during swarms in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. In Pokémon FireRed, Delibird can also be caught in Icefall Cave on Four Island of the Sevii Islands. In Pokémon Stadium 2, Delibird stars in its own mini-game called "Delibird's Delivery". Players collect presents from one side of the field to the other, while avoiding being tripped by Swinub.
Delibird's anime debut was in the episode "Dues and Don'ts," in which a Delibird belonging to Team Rocket follows Jessie, James, and Meowth around under orders to collect the enormous debt the three have amassed during the years with constant requests for Pokémon-shaped mechas and other devices. This Delibird appears in several episodes in the series set in Johto. Another Delibird, a helper of Santa Claus, appeared in "Delibird's Present," an episode of the Pikachu's Winter Vacation 3 holiday special also shown as part of Pokémon Chronicles.
GamesRadar's Raymond Padilla wrote that it "looks weird and more than a bit silly". Comics Alliance's Chris Sims wrote that while it did not seem creepy at first, the Poké Dex entry which discusses how it carries food home to its chicks made it morally questionable that trainers would try to capture them. Comics Alliance also featured it in their article on the best and worst Pokémon.


== MantineEdit ==
Mantine (マンタイン, Mantain in original Japanese language versions) is a dark blue manta ray with two large wings branching off its body, and a very, very long, kite-like, light blue tail. It is often depicted having a Remoraid attached to its side eating Mantine's leftovers. In the anime, Mantine protects Remoraid's offspring, while the parent Remoraid help the Mantine in tough decisions. Mantine swims in open sea, participating in schools. Its large and well-developed wings enable it to briefly leap over the sea's surface if it builds up enough speed, in a manner similar to some real aquatic species. Mantine is a filter feeder, like whales; its diet consists of most things that happen to enter its mouth while swimming. It may be based on a jet plane, with Remoraid acting as missiles or torpedoes, and is most likely a counterpart to Octillery, being based on a military vehicle and its evolution line being so closely dependent on Remoraid.


== SkarmoryEdit ==
Skarmory (エアームド, Eāmudo, Airmd in original Japanese language versions) is an avian Pokémon with a body of metal armor and feathers. Its hollow body allows it to fly over 180 miles per hour in the sky. Skarmory raises its offspring in bramble bushes, the thorny environment causing the offspring's bodies to become more resistant. Skarmory's wings become battered from repeated battles, so it grows the feathers back to the original state once a year. Feathers from Skarmory have been used by people of the past as knives and swords. It also has a cameo on the Pokémon Stadium 2's flying stage in Super Smash Bros. Brawl. Skarmory also appeared in a Pokémon Mystery Dungeon special. It is based on the Stymphalian birds of Greek mythology.
Skarmory is the main antagonist of Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Team Go-Getters Out Of The Gate!. He kidnaps Pikachu and ties him up in a vine. As Pichu and the Go-Getters Team reach the mountain, he kidnaps Pichu and ties him next to Pikachu.


== HoundourEdit ==
Houndour (デルビル, Derubiru, Delvil in original Japanese language versions), known as the Dark Pokémon, is a dog-like Pokémon resembling a Doberman Pinscher. Houndour has short black fur, a red underbelly and snout, short pointed ears and tail, white bands on its ankles and back, and what appears to be a skull on its forehead and ribs on its back. Houndour is a nocturnal carnivorous Pokémon that organizes itself in packs. A Houndour pack works with perfect teamwork to pursue prey. Individual members of the pack approach the intended target from different spots and begin the hunt. They then communicate their location to each other using special howls, ensuring that the victim is eventually surrounded and unable to escape. They are very protective of one another and will not abandon any of its pack if they are hurt.
Houndour made its anime debut in Hour of the Houndour. A pack of these Pokémon were stealing food to aid their badly wounded leader. Ash helped the ailing Houndour to a Pokémon Center. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Gold is attacked and defeated by 4 Pokémon, including a Houndour, when he enters the Ilex Forest, and is then warned to stay out by the Mask of Ice.


== HoundoomEdit ==
Houndoom (ヘルガー, Herugā, Hellgar in original Japanese language versions) live in packs, whose leader is decided by fierce fighting among its members, is a doberman pinscher and rottweiler-like Pokémon. The leader develops horns sharply raked towards its back to display its dominant status. A Houndoom's body is filled with volatile toxins that ignite when exposed to air, causing pungent-smelling flames to be shot. The flames cause a severe pain that can never be alleviated. Houndoom is a feared predator among Pokémon, with its howl being likened to the howl of the Grim Reaper in legend. Just the sound of its howl is enough to send all other Pokémon which hear it hurrying back to the safety of their nests. Its appearance may possibly be connected to mythological creatures like Cerberus or a hellhound. The Golden Jackal occasionally have small horns, called Jackal's Horn, which are said to have mystical properties.
In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine, Houndoom was voted as one of the best Fire-type Pokémon. They described it as having "the most vicious dog breath ever", and that "it has toxic flames in its belly and shoots malodorous flames from its mouth". However, they criticized it for being "one of the least imaginatively named Pokémon in existence".


== KingdraEdit ==
Kingdra (キングドラ, Kingudora) is resemblant of a large, blue weedy sea dragon with two branch-like horns on its head and two pairs of flippers on each side. It is said that Kingdra lives and sleeps at the bottom of the sea floor, at extreme underwater depths that are otherwise devoid of life due to water pressure. It also usually hides in underwater caves. It is believed to create maelstroms by yawning. When a storm arrives, it is said to awaken and wander about in search of prey. When it comes to the surface, it creates a huge whirlpool with enough force to swallow ships.


== PhanpyEdit ==
Phanpy (ゴマゾウ, Gomazō, Gomazou in original Japanese language versions) is a small, elephant-like Pokémon that has a large snout that serves various purposes. Its large ears act as fans to cool it down. Phanpy possesses the strength to lift an adult human; playful behavior with one may prove dangerous. It lives in nests that are vertical holes dug at a river's shore. The area around the nest is claimed by Phanpy by marking it with its trunk, warning other Pokémon to keep out. In the mornings, Phanpy uses its trunk by the river's edge to give itself a shower. When many Phanpy gather, they soak each other wet with their trunks, and dry at the edge of the water.
In the anime, Ash obtains an egg that hatches into a Phanpy. Later, it evolves into Donphan. Phanpy is a starter or partner in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky.


== DonphanEdit ==
Donphan (ドンファン, Donfan in original Japanese language versions) is an armored elephant-like Pokémon that can easily take normal attacks without receiving a scratch. Its large, sharp tusks that take long to grow serve as a status symbol in their herds. It can easily haul dump trucks and demolish houses by tackling them. This strength is often used to clear rock and mud slides that block trails. Its favorite attack is the "Rollout", where it curls into a ball and charges at high speeds, though it is hard for it to stop.
Donphan first appeared in Pokémon: The First Movie. In the anime, Ash owns a Donphan that evolved from a Phanpy. In Pokémon Stadium 2, Donphan stars in its own minigame called "Rampage Rollout". Players have to run about around a square race track while throwing funnels of wind at opponents.
A GamesRadar staff member named it one of his favorite Pokémon and described it as "somewhat useful" but also that it wouldn't be on his tournament. Another editor called it a "fun Pokémon".


== Porygon2Edit ==
Porygon2 (ポリゴン2, Porigon Tsu in original Japanese language versions) is an improved version of its pre-evolution Porygon. It has enhanced abilities, including increased potency in combat. As opposed to most evolved Pokémon, Porygon2 is shorter and lighter than Porygon. Its artificial intelligence has been developed to such a degree as to give it the capacity to learn on its own from its surroundings and experiences. This results in Porygon2 occasionally exhibiting behavior or motions that were not included in its original programming. Porygon2 was originally intended to be used as a space probe. Unfortunately, since it cannot fly, such an application has been abandoned.
Porygon2 evolves from a Porygon that has been traded while holding the Up-Grade item, and will evolve into Porygon-Z if it is traded while holding the Dubious Disc item. Porygon2 also makes two cameos in the fighting games Super Smash Bros. and its successor, Super Smash Bros. Melee. It is one of an assortment of Pokémon that can emerge from a Poké Ball item, and a collectible Porygon2 trophy can also be obtained.
Porygon2 has never appeared in the Pokémon anime, most likely due to the controversial Pokémon episode: Dennō Senshi Porygon (Electric Soldier Porygon).


== StantlerEdit ==
Stantler (オドシシ, Odoshishi in original Japanese language versions) is a deer-like Pokémon with large, curved antlers. These antlers change the flow of the air, causing the space around them to act as a distorted reality, and leaving other beings around the Stantler confused and lost in their senses. This allows it to create hallucinations to aid it in battle or allow it to escape. The antlers are considered art in the Pokémon world, causing the Stantler to almost be hunted to extinction as the trading market of the antlers reached very high prices. The orbs on fallen antlers are often ground into a powder that helps people sleep. Stantler's name is derived from stag, meaning a male deer, and antler, referring to the horn-like growths on its head.


== SmeargleEdit ==
Smeargle (ドーブル, Dōburu, Doble in original Japanese language versions) is the painter of the Pokémon world, best known for its unique "Sketch" attack. It is a dog-like Pokémon with a long tail that ends in a tuft of fur similar to a paintbrush. The tuft is continuously soaked by a special fluid secreted from the tip of the tail. The color of the fluid is predetermined for each Smeargle. The fluid is used to mark the boundaries of its territory and print its footprints on the backs of its fellows once they reach maturity. Over 5,000 distinctive marks left by the species have been found in the Pokémon world.
Smeargle is the only Pokémon that can learn the "Sketch" technique. When used, it will permanently replace itself with the last technique used by an opponent Pokémon against Smeargle. It learns Sketch every ten levels, but can learn it at any time from the Move Relearner. It can learn nearly any attack in the game, however, there are a few exceptions, such as Chatot's signature move Chatter. However, Smeargle has poor stats apart from its usable base 75 Speed, meaning that it tends to play a support role with moves like Baton Pass and Spore.


== TyrogueEdit ==
Tyrogue (バルキー, Barukī, Balkie in original Japanese language versions) is a fighting Pokémon with three different evolutions, the first generation's Hitmonlee and Hitmonchan, and one introduced in the second generation, Hitmontop. The Pokémon that it evolves into is based upon the Attack and Defense statistics of the Tyrogue at the point of evolution. Tyrogue is very energetic; it puts this energy into training. It constantly challenges, or randomly attacks, different Pokémon in order to get stronger, though it often ends up with injuries caused by much stronger Pokémon. Even if it loses, it will never give up on its training. If a captive Tyrogue doesn't have various set training methods established by its trainer, it will often become stressed. Tyrogue and its evolutions are based as all male.


== HitmontopEdit ==
Hitmontop (カポエラー, Kapoerā, Capoeirer in original Japanese language versions) has a sharp point on the top of its head which allows it to balance itself upside-down on its head, the position which it holds in much of the time while it is observed. While it can walk upright, it often travels by spinning like a top, letting it travel much faster. Using the centrifugal force to boost its attack by ten times, it launches elegant kicks while spinning. This allows it to throw off its opponent's timing, and give it a good mix of offense and defense. If it spins fast enough, it can dig into the ground. Any punch or hand based moves bred onto or learned by a Tyrogue will carry into either of its evolved forms . This means that even a Hitmontop can know a move like Mach Punch or High Jump Kick. Its Japanese name is most likely a variation of the Brazilian/African fighting style capoeira.
In Pokémon Stadium 2, Hitmontop stars in its own minigame called "Topsy-Turvy". Players have to try to knock their opponents out of the circular ring.


== SmoochumEdit ==
Smoochum (ムチュール, Muchūru, Muchul) is the pre-evolution of Jynx. It is a female-only species that uses its lips, the most sensitive part of its body, to examine new and unfamiliar objects, and remember its likes and dislikes. This sensitivity quickly develops as it grows. It actively runs about, but often falls. When idle, it rocks its head back and forth, as if it were kissing someone. It constantly searches for ways to see its reflection, so it can see if its face is dirty.
Smoochum first appeared in Pokémon Gold and Silver only available by breeding a Jynx with a similar Pokémon or with the Pokémon Ditto. It is one of several baby versions of Pokémon species introduced in Gold and Silver, which includes Pichu, Igglybuff, Cleffa, Tyrogue, Elekid, and Magby. It has since appeared in every main Pokémon title since, notably Pokémon Diamond and Pearl where it was made available in the wild for the first time. Outside of the main series, Smoochum appears in Pokémon Channel, Pokémon Trozei!, the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, Pokémon Ranger: Guardian Signs, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure.
Smoochum has made multiple appearances in the Pokémon anime. Smoochum appeared in the short film titled Pikachu & Pichu which preceded the film Pokémon 3: The Movie. In the television series, it appears in the episode The Screen Actor's Guilt where an actor owns a Smoochum, and his agent attempts to keep them apart in fear that the actor owning a Smoochum would damage his reputation. In another episode, it is separated from three Jynx because of Team Rocket member Jessie, but is rescued by the Jynx, Ash Ketchum, and his companions. Smoochum has made several minor appearances, including being owned by Jessie for a brief period of time.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a Smoochum appears on two separate occasions: once in the ninth volume where it is one of several baby Pokémon that escape from a day care, and one named Chumee that is consistently used by the character Crystal as part of a team of Pokémon that she uses to capture other Pokémon. Smoochum also appears in the Magical Pokémon Journey manga where it is the younger sister of a fortune telling Jynx. It attempts to tell fortunes, but it has no ability to do so and ends up telling bad fortunes.
Nintendo released a series of Pokémon handheld systems called Pokémon mini, some of which were coloured purple and themed after Smoochum.
Since its first appearance, Smoochum has received mostly negative reception. Smoochum ranks as the 10th least favourite Pokémon among IGN readers. IGN's Jack DeVries listed a number of reasons why it is so disliked, which included a sentiment that human-shaped Pokémon are "creepy as hell" and its name. 1UP.com's Michael Vreeland wrote that the Pokémon Gothita looks like "a Smoochum whose mother got it plastic surgery and then took it shopping at Hot Topic". Official Nintendo Magazine‍ '​s Thomas East wrote that Smoochum's name was "amusing" and that it could have made a list of the five best Pokémon names. ComicsAlliance's David Uzumeri and Chris Sims covered Smoochum in their "Best and Worst of Pokémon" article. David wrote that it was "needy-looking" while Chris wrote "I don't even know what to say about it other than 'This exists.'" GamesRadar's Carolyn Gudmundson wrote that she was "thankful for all 489 Pokemon species", a number which was normally 493 but she stated that Smoochum along with three other Pokémon were "all dead" to her.


== ElekidEdit ==
Elekid (エレキッド, Erekiddo) is the baby form of Electabuzz, introduced in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal. Elekid stores electricity in its body by constantly rotating its arms, causing the space between its AC power plug-like horns to flicker with a bluish-white electrical charge. It easily tires out, so it can only charge a little bit at a time. If it were to accidentally touch metal it would discharge its electricity. It is always happy when there is thunder rumbling, even in the most vicious of storms.
Elekid's first appearance in the anime, albeit minor is in the Pokémon episode, Misty Meets Her Match. In the episode, Tracey Sketchit shows Professor Oak a sketch of Elekid horns sticking out a bush, via video call. Tracey claimed that it could be an undiscovered Pokémon.
Film-wise, Elekid debuted in the second Pikachu short film, Pikachu's Rescue Adventure, in which a wild Elekid befriended Pikachu and friends, and led them to where Togepi had accidentally ended up.


== MagbyEdit ==
Magby (ブビィ, Bubyi, Buby in original Japanese language versions) is the baby form of Magmar. Its body temperature and the fire that it breathes are constantly over 1100 F. Its health is determined by the state of its flame; healthy Magby have pure yellow flames, while black smoke is mixed in with unhealthy ones. As it breathes, embers constantly dribble out of its nostrils and its mouth. It lives in volcanic craters, and an eruption is imminent when many Magby gather in one place.


== MiltankEdit ==
Miltank ( ミルタンク, Mirutanku) is a milk cow type Pokémon that resembles a Jersey cow, a type of dairy cow, and provides a highly nutritious milk, especially during a post-gestation period (although Pokémon all hatch from eggs, even those based on viviparous animals). Its name is a portmanteau of the words milk and tank. Miltank's milk and its derivatives, such as yogurt, are popular with children and adults and can even be used as a form of natural medicine for the sick and weary, as well as other Pokémon. Over five gallons of milk can be gathered daily from a single Miltank.
In Pokémon Gold and Silver, Whitney, Gym Leader of Goldenrod City owns a Miltank. Whitney's Miltank has gained infamy for its use of the move Rollout, which, with enough momentum, can steamroll through a gym challenger's team. Competitively, Miltank has access to a boosting move, Curse, which can raise its Attack to dangerous levels; its signature move Milk Drink and status-healing move Heal Bell give it longevity. Thanks to the Scrappy ability, Ghost types are not immune to its Normal-type moves, though Rock- and Steel- types will be difficult to wear down.
The MooMoo Farm has five Miltank, but the fifth Miltank named MooMoo must be healed being fed berries. When you do this you are rewarded with the TM Snore in "Gold" "Silver" or "Crystal."In "HeartGold" and "SoulSilver" you are rewarded with a seal case, and some seals. Miltank first appeared in the anime under the ownership of Whitney during A Goldenrod Opportunity and A Dairy Tale Ending. In Got Miltank?, a Miltank was guarding an area that was for Pokémon only. Four Miltank appeared in Tanks for the Memories!. One under Autumn's ownership, nicknamed "Ilta" (ルータン Rūtan), two under Spring's and another one under Summer's.
While IGN's Kristine stated that she did not really like it, she called it "by far my favourite Pokémon" because of how "ridiculous" it looks.


== BlisseyEdit ==
Blissey, Happinas (ハピナス, Hapinasu) in original Japanese language versions, is very compassionate and caring, and if it detects any feelings of sadness through its fur, it will immediately sprint towards the source and share one of its eggs. This egg is an exquisite delicacy in the Pokémon universe, and it immediately causes whoever eats it to enter a state of euphoria, becoming kindhearted to everyone. Blissey will tend to any ailing creature with loving care, using the healing power in its egg. Blissey has the most "hit points" of any Pokémon in the games, meaning that it has the most stamina of any Pokémon, as well as the highest special defence of any normal-type Pokémon, making it a popular defensive choice. It is a female-only species.
In the anime, Blissey appears a lot in Pokémon Centers alongside Nurse Joy. Blissey and the various Nurse Joys (of which there are many) are trusted with the medical care of many different types of Pokémon. In one episode, Jessie of Team Rocket reunites with a Blissey who used to be a Chansey when they were both studying to be nurses.


== RaikouEdit ==

Raikou ( ライコウ, Raikō), known as the Thunder Pokémon, is one of the three "Legendary Beasts" that are featured in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal. According to legend, the Legendary Beasts were reincarnated by Ho-Oh from the spirits of three Pokémon which died in the fire that gave Burnt Tower its name. They are awakened in this tower in their first appearance. Another myth maintains that Raikou descended to earth together with a lightning bolt. Each Beast personifies a force of nature - Raikou, in particular, embodies the speed of lightning.
Raikou is a yellow tiger-like creature that stores tremendous energy inside its body. It has black stripes that resemble lightning bolts and a white under-side, and a skinny, light-blue tail with a star-shaped formation at the end. Raikou appears to have a purple cape that is supposedly made of thunderclouds. Most of Raikou's face is white with a light-blue "X" on its face and a gray crest on its forehead. Raikou has red eyes and long fangs in its upper jaws that make its appearance similar to the sabre-tooth cat. It has the ability to shoot bolts of lightning from the rain clouds on its back. Raikou's roar is aptly described as "thunderous". It is loud enough to create shock waves and shake the ground as if actual thunder had struck. Raikou is normally distrustful of humans because humans have tried to capture the Legendary Beast of Thunder for many centuries, though it has shown some friendship with those that just wish to help it. As a member of the legendary beast trio, Raikou is constantly on the move, although it tends to show up either when there is a thunderstorm or when other Electric-type Pokémon are in danger.
Raikou first appears in the Game Boy Color video games Pokémon Gold and Silver. Upon being approached by the player's character, Raikou, along with its counterparts Entei and Suicune, flee, traveling at incredible speeds across Johto. The three of them will randomly appear on a certain route, fleeing from battle at the first opportunity. The three of them later appear in Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen; however, only one of them appears in a single play through. If the player chooses Squirtle, Raikou will appear in a similar fashion to how it appeared in Gold and Silver. In Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, Raikou is encountered similarly to how it is in Gold and Silver. To promote the release of Pokémon Black and White, players can download the shiny Entei, Raikou, and Suicune from GameStop stores on various weeks in January and February 2011, which will activate the Zoroark event in the games. Raikou also appears in the Gamecube game Super Smash Bros. Melee, when released from a Poké Ball, Raikou releases a powerful Spark attack that electrocutes any opponents that get caught in it.
Raikou is featured in a special anime episode called Raikou - The Legend of Thunder that forms the first three episodes of Pokémon Chronicles. In the special, two Team Rocket agents-Atilla and Hun, scheme to capture Raikou with a device that reflects and deflects energy blasts. Three New Bark Town trainers risk their own lives to try to save Raikou. It is thought by the trainers that Raikou attempts to guard other electric Pokémon from danger whenever possible.
In an interview, Tsunekazu Ishihara, President of The Pokémon Company, described Raikou as well as the other two Legendary Beasts Entei and Suicune as appealing and exciting to both new and old players; he states that they would evoke memories for old players, while new players would be surprised by the random appearance of them. Raikou was included by MTV's Multiplayer Blog as one of the nominees in the "Greatest Canine In Video Game History" article, along with Entei and Suicune. In the end, however, none of them were chosen by readers or by the panel of judges.


== EnteiEdit ==

Entei ( エンテイ, Entei), known as the Volcano Pokémon, is born during the eruption of a volcano. It is one of the three "Legendary Beasts" that are featured in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal. According to Pokémon legend, the Legendary Beasts were reincarnated by Ho-Oh from the spirits of three Pokémon which died in the fire that gave the Burned Tower its name. It is a chinese guardian lion-like creature covered in brown fur with a long, thick mane covering its neck. It has gray plates surrounding the cape that makes it look as if smoke is coming out of a crater on its back. Entei has white paws and black cuff-like bands on its legs, It has a red face with a white plate that resembles a handlebar mustache on its face, and a three-pointed yellow crest on its forehead. Entei's head appears to resemble a kabuto, a samurai helmet. Myths say that it is born during the eruption of a volcano, and that a new one is born along with each volcano. It is an embodiment of magma, being able to launch powerfully searing fire that is hotter than magma from its mouth. When it roars, it can make a volcano erupt on another part of the globe.


== SuicuneEdit ==
Suicune ( スイクン, Suikun), known as the Aurora Pokémon, is one of the three "Legendary Beasts" that are featured in Pokémon Gold, Silver, and Crystal. According to legend, the Legendary Beasts were reincarnated by Ho-Oh from the spirits of three Pokémon which died in the fire that gave Burnt Tower its name. Suicune is the reincarnation of north winds. Furthermore, Suicune is thought to have represented the winds and water used to restore the building after it was destroyed by a large fire(Entei), due to a great lightning bolt(Raikou) striking down on the building. Suicune is a blue qilin-like creature, with white diamond-shaped spots and a white underside. Suicune has a purple cape that resembles a northern aurora or a flowing river and two white streamer-like tails, which always seem to be blown by wind from behind it. It has a hexagonal, aquamarine-colored crest on its forehead, red irises, a protrusion on the underside of its chin and small paws. Its paws have a small white oval on their undersides. Suicune has the power to purify dirty water, and can walk across water. Northern winds always seems to blow where ever it shows up. Since Suicune is a member of the Legendary Beast Trio, Suicune races around the land, in search for a pure reservoir.
Since its appearance in the Pokémon series, Suicune has received generally positive reception. It has been featured in several forms of merchandise, including figures, plush toys, the Pokémon Trading Card Game, and others. It also appears in the Super Smash Bros. series as a Poké Ball summon, using Aurora Beam upon being released. Suicune also appears as a playable fighter in Pokkén Tournament. In an interview, Tsunekazu Ishihara, President of The Pokémon Company, described Suicune as well as the other two Legendary Beasts Raikou and Entei as appealing and exciting to both new and old players; he states that they would evoke memories for old players, while new players would be surprised by the random appearance of them. Suicune was included by MTV's Multiplayer Blog as one of the nominees in the "Greatest Canine In Video Game History" article, along with Raikou and Entei, despite the fact that they are not actually meant to be dogs. In the end, however, none of them were chosen by readers or by the panel of judges. GamesRadar called Suicune one of its favourite Pokémon, along with Celebi. In a poll conducted by IGN, it was voted as the 16th best Pokémon, where the staff commented on how "weird and cool" it is, describing it as being "totally based on Japenese  [sic] unicorns".


== LarvitarEdit ==
Larvitar, Yogiras (ヨーギラス, Yōgirasu) in original Japanese language versions, is born deep underground where it feeds on dirt in order to reach the surface, and enable it to find its parents. After it has eaten a large mountain or a comparable amount of dirt, it falls into a deep sleep and begins the evolutionary process to evolve into Pupitar.
In Pokémon: Master Quest, Ash Ketchum, en route to New Bark Town after winning all eight Johto League badges, is asked to deliver a Pokémon egg to Professor Elm. However, on the way, the egg hatches, and Larvitar was born. Soon afterwards, Professor Elm asks Ash and company to return Larvitar to its home in Mt. Silver. It doesn't open up to anyone except Ash and Pikachu, who nurse it from sickness. This is due to its abduction by a gang of Pokémon poachers as well as the physical harm they caused to its mother, Tyranitar. It eventually opens up to others, and is returned to its mother on Mt. Silver.


== PupitarEdit ==
Pupitar, Sanagiras (サナギラス, Sanagirasu) in original Japanese language versions, is a pupa stage in the process of Larvitar evolving into Tyranitar. Though it is in a shell, it already has developed arms and legs under it. This allows it to thrash about, and have a lot of mobility. This mobility is heightened by it creating a special pressurized gas that can be released to propel itself at high speeds. Using the bedrock toughness of its shell and its natural strength, it can easily topple mountains, and withstand an impact with solid steel.
In the anime, Ritchie has a Pupitar named Cruise which is seen from The Mystery is History! to A Promise is a Promise. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Pupitar first appeared in one of Lance's flashbacks in Volume 12, where he first encountered Silver. He switched out Pupitar to counter the Pursuit from Silver's Murkrow.


== TyranitarEdit ==
Tyranitar, Bangiras (バンギラス, Bangirasu) in original Japanese language versions, is the final evolution of Larvitar. Tyranitar is a large, green, reptilian Pokémon, that appears to have spikes near the end of its tail with the tip of the tail itself being segmented. Tyranitar's feet and hands each have three claws on them. Tyranitar has a blue rhombus on its chest and has two rows of green spikes running down its back. There are black, triangular holes on Tyranitar's knees, chest and back. Tyranitar are extremely strong, and their thick, rocky hides give them a good resistance. Because of this, they are always roaming mountains to seek opponents. If enraged, Tyranitar sets off outstanding earthquakes that can completely change the entire landscape. Tyranitar has the base stat total of a pseudo-legendary, making it one of the current seven pseudo-legendaries.
In Pokémon Colosseum, a Tyranitar is considered the "Ultimate Shadow Pokémon", and is owned by the boss of Cipher, Evice. It is not the last Shadow Pokémon, but it is the highest-leveled one. Tyranitar first appeared in the anime in Celebi: Voice of the Forest. It was captured in a Dark Ball and used by the Iron-Masked Marauder. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Silver was given a Pupitar from Lance. It evolved into Tyranitar prior to Silver's showdown with Gold in Volume 9. Silver remarked that Tyranitar's level was so high that he couldn't control it, and eventually returned Tyranitar to Lance.
IGN listed him as the best Dark type, calling him "one of the strongest Pokémon in the game."


== LugiaEdit ==

Lugia (ルギア, Rugia) are primarily pale silver-white, but have blue undersides with slightly varying tones. They have a somewhat beak-like, ridged mouth, although they have teeth on their lower jaw. Their head has a point to the back, and their eyes have pointed blue spikes on them. Lugia have long slender necks and their bodies are smooth and covered with streamlined feathers, with the exception of dark blue or black spike-like protrusions which run down the length of their back, and two smaller ones on the ends of their tails. They have large wings that resemble hands, similar to a personified bird wing. Lugia possess the ability to calm storms and are said to appear when storms start. They are also said to be able to spawn a storm lasting as long as 40 days by flapping their wings. A light flutter of a Lugia's wings is capable of causing winds powerful enough to blow apart regular houses. Lugia are highly intelligent, and isolate themselves at the bottom of the sea, where they tend to slumber in solitude at the bottom of a deep oceanic trench, in order to avoid accidentally causing damage with their devastating power.
Lugia's stats make it one of the best defensive Pokémon in the game, with access to Roost and Recover as well as Multiscale (in the fifth generation and beyond).


== Ho-OhEdit ==
Ho-Oh (ホウオウ, Hōō), known as the "Rainbow Pokémon", is a Legendary Pokémon that resembles a phoenix. In Pokémon folklore, the two towers, the Brass Tower and Tin Tower (known as Bell Tower in HeartGold and SoulSilver) were the roost of Lugia and Ho-Oh, respectively. When the Brass Tower burned down, both Pokémon fled, never to be seen again. Three Pokémon became trapped in the flames of the Brass Tower and perished. Ho-Oh returned to the Burned Tower and resurrected the three Pokémon, who were renamed Raikou, Entei, and Suicune. Kinkaku-ji's iconic fenghuang (鳳凰, Hōō) statue inspired the Pokémon Ho-Oh (Hōō). along with the huma bird.
Ho-Oh is called the "Rainbow Pokémon" due to its various associations with rainbows. Its feathers constantly change through the rainbow's spectrum of colors as light hits them from different angles. These leave a rainbow trail as it flies continuously through the world's skies, though it is said to live at the foot of a rainbow. It has been observed to be territorial at times when its nest is disturbed. It freely flies the world's skies, only revealing itself to a Trainer with a pure heart.
It first appears in the games in Pokémon Gold and Silver, later appearing in subsequent sequels, including the remakes Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver. It is the mascot of Gold and HeartGold, and appears on the box art of both. Ho-Oh appears in Super Smash Bros. Melee and Brawl, available by use of a Poké Ball.
Ho-Oh has been seen at many occasions in the anime series. It made its debut appearance in the first episode of the anime, when Ash notices it towards the end of the episode after a thunderstorm, but his PokéDex at the time was told that it was not identified. In Master Quest, after Ash completes the Silver Conference and while he is planning to set out for a new journey, he notices Ho-Oh flying towards the region of Hoenn, and he gets encouraged to go for new adventures in Hoenn. Later in Advanced Generation, Ho-Oh reappeared in Battling the Enemy Within!, when Ash noticed it flying high after losing an informal challenge against Pyramid King Brandon. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Ho-Oh was used by the Masked Man; however, he had lost control over Ho-Oh and it attacked the Tin Tower. At the Indigo Plateau, Pryce wreaks havoc with Lugia and Ho-Oh under his control.
Ho-Oh has extremely high Attack and Special Defense, which can be taken advantage of with powerful physical moves such as Brave Bird and Sacred Fire.
IGN ranked Ho-Oh 14th in a list of the "Top 100 Pokémon". They cited its appearance in the first episode "magical", which enticed them to watch to catch it. 1UP.com's Jeremy Parish criticized Ho-Oh's design; he described it as "a dopey looking fire buzzard" and that it was "closely related" to Cocoa Puffs mascot Sonny. He added that even its name was poor. IGN's "Pokémon of the Day Chick" wrote that Ho-Oh was less "cheap" than its silver counterpart, Lugia, and also it looked more attractive.
In an interview, anime director Masamitsu Hidaka stated Ho-Oh's significance to Ash by saying that it is just a plot device to get Ash moving and to show that he is special.


== CelebiEdit ==

Celebi (セレビィ, Serebī) is a green fairy-like Pokémon. Celebi has round toe-less feet, three-fingered hands, and clear wings on its back. Celebi has a round head that comes to a point and sticks upward in the back. It has large baby-blue eyes, with thick black rings around them, and a pair of green antennae that are tipped blue. Celebi is a time traveling legendary Pokémon that debuted in Pokémon Gold and Pokémon Silver. It is known as the guardian of the forest, where it is worshipped as a god. It is a very rare Pokémon. It wanders through time, visiting various undisturbed old-growth forests during peaceful times, leaving behind flourishing grass and trees. It often leaves behind an egg that it brought from the future. Celebi's continuing existence signifies a good future.


== ReferencesEdit ==