A bass player, or bassist, is a musician who plays a bass instrument such as a double bass, bass guitar, keyboard bass or a low brass instrument such as a tuba or sousaphone. Different musical genres tend to be associated with one or more of these instruments. Since the 1960s, the electric bass has been the standard bass instrument for rock and roll, jazz fusion, heavy metal, country, reggae and pop music. The double bass is the standard bass instrument for classical music, bluegrass, rockabilly, and most genres of jazz. Low brass instruments such as the tuba or sousaphone are the standard bass instrument in Dixieland and New Orleans-style jazz bands.
Despite the associations of different bass instruments with certain genres, there are exceptions. Some 1990s and 2000s rock and pop bands use a double bass, such as both Andrew Jackson Jihad, Barenaked Ladies; Indie band The Decemberists; and punk rock/psychobilly groups such as The Living End, Nekromantix, The Horrorpops, and Tiger Army. Some fusion jazz groups use a lightweight, stripped-down electric upright bass rather than a double bass. Some composers of modern art music use the electric bass in a chamber music setting. Some jazz big bands use electric bass. Some fusion, R&B and house music groups use synth bass or keyboard bass rather than electric bass. Some Dixieland bands use double bass or electric bass instead of a tuba. In some jazz groups and jam bands, the basslines are played by a Hammond organ player, who uses the bass pedal keyboard or the lower manual for the low notes.


== Electric bass playersEdit ==

Electric bassists play the bass guitar. In most rock, pop, metal and country genres, the bass line outlines the harmony of the music being performed, while simultaneously indicating the rhythmic pulse. In addition, there are many different standard bass line types for different genres and types of song (e.g. blues ballad, fast swing, etc.). Bass lines often emphasize the root, third, and fifth of the chord progression being used in a given song. In addition, pedal tones (repeated or sustained single notes), ostinatos, and bass riffs are also used as bass lines. While most electric bass players rarely play chords (two or more notes all sounded at the same time), chords are used in some styles, especially jazz, Latin and heavy metal music.
A shortlist of some of the notable bassists includes:
Victor Bailey (Weather Report)
Michael "Flea" Balzary (Red Hot Chili Peppers)
Jo Bench (Bolt Thrower)
Jeff Berlin
Jack Bruce (Cream)
Cliff Burton (Metallica)
Geezer Butler (Black Sabbath, GZR, Ozzy Osbourne)
Nathan East (Eric Clapton, Fourplay, Phil Collins, Philip Bailey)
John Entwistle (The Who)
Kim Gordon (Sonic Youth)
Larry Graham (Sly and the Family Stone, Graham Central Station)
Stuart Hamm (Joe Satriani, Steve Vai, Frank Gambale)
James Jamerson (The Funk Brothers)
Joan Jett (The Runaways, Joan Jett & the Blackhearts)
John Paul Jones (Led Zeppelin, Them Crooked Vultures)
Carol Kaye
Geddy Lee (Rush)
Paul McCartney (The Beatles, Wings)
Jason Newsted (Voivod, Metallica, Ozzy Osbourne)
Jaco Pastorius (Pat Metheny, Weather Report, Joni Mitchell)
John Patitucci (Chick Corea)
Chuck Rainey
Billy Sheehan (Niacin, Mr. Big, Steve Vai, David Lee Roth)
Sting (The Police)
Sid Vicious (Sex Pistols)
Bill Wyman (The Rolling Stones)
Steve Harris (Iron Maiden)


== Double bass playersEdit ==


=== Classical double bass playersEdit ===
For a long list, see the List of contemporary classical double bass players.
A shortlist of notable double bass players includes:
Johannes Matthias Sperger (1750–1812) bassist, composer
Domenico Dragonetti (1763–1845) bassist, composer, conductor
Giovanni Bottesini (1821–1889) bassist, composer, conductor
Franz Simandl (1840–1912) bassist, composer, pedagogue
Edouard Nanny (1872–1943) bassist, composer, pedagogue
Serge Koussevitzky (1874–1951) bassist, conductor, composer
Gary Karr (1941–present)
Edgar Meyer (1960–present)


=== Jazz double-bass playersEdit ===

For a long list, see the List of jazz bassists, which includes both double bass and electric bass players.
A shortlist of notable jazz bassists includes:
Jimmy Blanton
Paul Chambers
Jimmy Garrison
Ron Carter
Scott La Faro
Richard Davis
Ray Brown
George Mraz
Eddie Gómez
Terry Plumeri
Milt Hinton
Sam Jones
Charles Mingus
Esperanza Spalding
Billy Peterson


=== Popular music double bass playersEdit ===
For a longer list, see the List of double bassists in popular music, which includes blues, folk, country, etc.
A shortlist of the notable bassists in these genres includes:
Barry Bales


=== See alsoEdit ===
List of contemporary classical double bass players
List of jazz bassists
List of double bassists in popular music
James Jamerson


== ReferencesEdit ==