The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of 67 of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Ruby and Sapphire versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== Wailmer ==
Wailmer (ホエルコ, Hoeruko in original Japanese language versions) was one of the "preview" Pokémon to the fourth generation of games, cards, and anime, having been released before the official release of the GBA versions.  It's native to Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, Pokémon Emerald, Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Pokémon Platinum, Pokémon Black and White, and Pokémon Black 2 and White 2. The shiny version of it has light purple where it's normally blue.
The name Wailmer is derived from the words whale, wail, mer (the French word for seia), and possibly toddler, due to its playful, childish demeanor. Its Japanese name, Hoeruko, is derived from the Japanese transliteration of the English word whale (ホエール, hoēru) and the Japanese words for to cry (吼える, hoeru) and child (子, ko). Unlike an actual whale, a Wailmer will spout water from its nose instead of a blowhole on its head. Wailmer will often land on beaches during sunny days and bounce around like a beach ball.


== Wailord ==
Wailord (ホエルオー, Hoeruō, Whaloh in original Japanese language versions) It can be found in the wild in all the same games that Wailmer can, and, like Wailmer, is purple in its shiny form.
It can dive more than 10,000 feet in a single breath, and is the largest of all Pokémon, though by no means the heaviest. Wailord is also quite popular because of its impressive atk and def stat. Wailord is also strong against the elite four because of its remarkable stats


== Numel ==
Numel (ドンメル, Donmeru, Donmel in original Japanese language versions) is a slow-witted Fire-type Pokémon that resembles a dromedary (a one-humped camel). Numel stores magma of almost 2,200 degrees Fahrenheit within its hump. If it gets wet, the magma cools and hardens, making it sluggish and heavy. Like Slowpoke and Slowbro of the first generation, Numel is extremely slow-witted, so much so that it won't react to being hit. However, a Numel will readily react to being hungry. Despite its apparent lack of intelligence, Numel are hardy Pokémon often used as pack mules (as they can transport 220-pound loads of anything). The shiny version is blue instead of green on top, and is a duller yellow on the rest. It's native to Pokemon Ruby and Sapphire, Pokemon Emerald, Pokemon Diamond and Pearl, Pokemon Platinum, Pokemon HeartGold and SoulSilver, and Pokemon White 2.


== Camerupt ==
Camerupt (バクーダ, Bakūda, Bakuuda in original Japanese language versions) is the evolution of Numel. A Camerupt is very similar in physiology to a Bactrian camel. However, instead of the usual humps on its back, it has volcanoes (the female has larger volcanoes on its back than the males), which are formed from its bones. Camerupt's body contains large amounts of molten lava, which was thought to only erupt out of its back once every 10 years, but the eruptions are more frequent if a Camerupt is angered. Much like real camels, Camerupt are usually placid, but may be very stubborn and bad tempered and will become violent if hit in the face. Camerupt is primarily red, and their shiny counterparts are mainly black. It can be caught in the wild in Pokemon Diamond and Pearl, Pokemon Platinum, and Pokemon White 2.
Camerupt gains a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.


== Torkoal ==
Torkoal (コータス, Kōtasu, Cotoise in original Japanese language versions) resembles a tortoise with a built-in furnace. It exhales an omnipresent cloud of smoke through its nostrils and through holes in its dark gray stone shell. It also consumes coal and will search through whole mountains to find it. If attacked, this Pokémon spouts thick black smoke in order to retreat unless it is running low on fuel. When emitting smoke from its nostrils, a Torkoal will let out a bellow that sounds similar to a locomotive's whistle. Its name is made up of the words tortoise and coal. Shiny Torkoals have a yellow body instead of brown, and the shell is tinted yellow as well. It can be found in Pokemon Ruby and Sapphire, Pokemon Emerald, Pokemon Diamond and Pearl, and Pokemon Platinum.
In the anime, Ash and friends help protect a Torkoal from the guardian of the place which consists of a Steelix. After saving it, Ash captures it. His Torkoal displays a large amount of affection for him and usually starts crying at random moments since it has low self-esteem and usually does everything wrong, like diving into the ocean. Upon his return to Kanto to participate in the Battle Frontier, Ash left Torkoal and Glalie with Professor Oak.


== Spoink ==
Spoink (バネブー, Banebū, Baneboo in original Japanese language versions) is a pig-like Pokémon that leads a bizarre, fragile existence. It possess no hind legs and motion is achieved by bouncing on its spring-like tail in a Tigger-like fashion, which it needs to do to live, as the constant bouncing is the only way it can keep its heart beating (so it can never stop bouncing, even if it's asleep). If a Spoink ever stops bouncing, it will die of cardiac arrest. The ball on a Spoink's head is actually a pearl, which it not only needs to amplify its psychic powers, but also needs to live, and will desperately search for anything round as a replacement should its pearl end up lost. A Spoink's psychic powers are dependent on the size of the pearl. The bigger the pearl, the stronger a Spoink's powers. Spoinks are native to Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, Pokémon Emerald, Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Pokémon Platinum, and Pokémon Black 2. Shiny Spoinks are sort of a pale pink with a gray pearl, rather than a gray body and pink pearl. The anime has not shown a Spoink dying because it stopped bouncing or didn't have its pearl (but it has been implied that a Spoink will become extremely weak without it).


== Grumpig ==
Grumpig (ブーピッグ, Būpiggu, Boopig in original Japanese language versions), known as the Manipulate Pokémon, is a swine-like Pokémon that wields powerful psychic powers. It uses the valuable black pearls on its body to harness and amplify its psychic powers. It can gain control over the movements and actions of its foes by expulsing psychic waves upon them, hence its designation as the Manipulate Pokémon. It appears to grow tired as it does this; in other words, its nose-snorting grows loud and labored. It dances bizarrely when using its psychic energy. Its style of dancing is hugely popular in many foreign countries and its black pearls on its head are considered valuable jewels. It is also capable of bouncing extraordinary heights with its spring-like tail, which it inherited from its younger evolutionary stage, Spoink. Grumpig can only be caught in Pokemon Black 2 (you have to evolve Spoink or trade for it otherwise). Shiny Grumpig are yellow instead of purple.


== Spinda ==
Spinda (パッチール, Patchīru, Patcheel in original Japanese language versions) is a Spot Panda Pokémon with swirls in its eyes and spots on its fur. Its name comes from the words spin and panda. Spinda's spots are determined by its game code personality value, meaning that there can be exactly 4,294,967,296 different variations of Spinda; double the amount if the shiny alternate-colored version is considered. No Spinda is the same as another, as all Spinda have different spots and spin patterns on their head and torso. Spinda resembles a small, upward standing rabbit- or bear-like creature, with a small body similar to that of Plusle or Minun. Spinda have the odd habit of staggering around when they walk. This makes them appear dizzy, but they are not. The teetering walk helps to confuse enemies and potential predators, messing up their aim.
In the anime, Ash and friends had to help a girl named Claire find a Spinda with a heart-shaped spot on its forehead. Brock, meanwhile, kept picking one up with a broken heart-shaped spot, to his displeasure. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Norman has a Spinda. He uses it in conjunction with his Slaking to switch their abilities with Skill Swap.
In an interview, Junichi Masuda noted Spinda as a favorite Pokémon of his due to its "well thought out" design. He noted that in order to make each Spinda have a different design, much planning and discussion had to be done to make it feasible in game. However, due to its low stats, most players consider Spinda to be a collectible gimmick.


== Trapinch ==
Trapinch (ナックラー, Nakkurā, Nuckrar in original Japanese language versions) is found in the desert. Its nest is a sloped, bowl-like pit dug in sand. It patiently waits for prey to tumble down the pit, where it attacks with its jaws with the strength to crush even boulders. It can wait for long periods of time, as it can go without water for a week. It has a large heavy head that makes it hard to get up if it falls on its back.
Trapinch's main weapons are its jaws, which can crush boulders. Trapinch are also known for their digging skills. In addition, Trapinch may have the ability Arena Trap, which prevents the switching of grounded Pokémon. It is based on an antlion larva.


== Vibrava ==
Vibrava (ビブラーバ, Biburāba) vibrate their wings incredibly fast, generating ultrasonic waves. These waves are potent enough to cause prey to faint. They will then devour their prey after spraying their hides with acid to decompose the body for easier digestion. The ultrasonic waves they create can also cause headaches in humans. As their wings are not fully developed, they instead use them for the purpose of stunning foes and prey. They can still fly short distances, however, and can learn the HM Fly.


== Flygon ==
Flygon (フライゴン, Furaigon), the Mystic Pokémon, has its natural habitat in the desert, across which it flies. Flygon's wings kick up a cloud of dust and sand each time they flap, so that whenever Flygon moves, it is surrounded by a constant sandstorm. This provides Flygon with a useful cover from enemies and other unwanted visitors who lose themselves in the dust cloud, while Flygon itself maintains perfect vision thanks to red covers that shield its eyes from the storm. But it is at a disadvantage in the jungle because the trees are so close together they cover almost the entire floor of the jungle from a bird's-eye view. It whips up sandstorms with powerful flaps of its wings, and is known as "The Desert Spirit." When inside a Flygon-created sandstorm, the only thing one is aware of is the melodious sound of Flygon's wings, which can resemble the notes of a song. Because of this, and the PokéDex related cry, it is thought that perhaps Flygon has the ability to buzz its wings at a rapid pace to create a melody.
In the games, Flygon is often mistakenly referred to as a "pseudo-legendary" Pokémon. It, along with others such as Slaking and Aggron, is known for its power but does not fit the criteria of being a "pseudo-legendary", which all have very high stats (none of Flygon's exceed base 100), are difficult to obtain (Trapinch are common in Route 111), and are located in the PokéDex just before the legendary Pokémon of that generation.
Like its pre-evolutions, Flygon is based on the antlion, though it has a reptilian appearance to further reflect its Dragon typing.


== Cacnea ==
Cacnea (サボネア, Sabonea in original Japanese language versions) prefers to live in harsh, arid locations, such as deserts. Cacnea live in or right next to bushes that are in the desert. The more arid and harsh the environment, the more pretty and fragrant type of flower a Cacnea can grow. It can survive for 30 days on water stored in its body. Cacnea releases a strong aroma from its flower to attract prey. When prey comes near, Cacnea shoots sharp thorns from its body to bring the victim down. This Pokémon battles by wildly swinging its thorny arms, a nod towards its signature move, Needle Arm.
In the anime, the most notable Cacnea is James's. He obtained it in the very episode in which his Weezing, along with Jessie's Arbok, was released. Cacnea is rather fond of James . However, when it attempts to express his fondness of James through hugging him, his numerous spikes injure James. Cacnea is the replacement in his party, for his former Grass type Pokémon, Victreebel, which also had a painful way of expressing affection. Jessie sometimes uses Cacnea in Pokémon Contests, but, like James, often fell victim to its spikes. James's Cacnea was recently given to Gardenia, who felt Cacnea wasn't living up to its full potential.


== Cacturne ==
Cacturne (ノクタス, Nokutasu, Noctus in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon of low metabolism that spends the day standing completely still, so that it will not lose any moisture from the scorching sun of the desert. At night, in low temperatures, Cacturne will group together and slowly follow any humans that are walking through the desert. When the fatigued human finally stops walking, the Cacturne will attack, absorbing moisture and fluids from the prey's body. After living in the desert for several millennia, new generations of Cacturne have had their blood transformed into the same substances as sand. Though they are not Ground, Steel, or Rock type, Cacturne are naturally immune to sandstorm courtesy of their Sand Veil ability, and will not be damaged by the weather effect. However, if it carries the hidden ability Water Absorb, it becomes vulnerable.
In the anime, May's rival Harley, who dresses like a Cacturne, has a Cacturne as his signature Pokémon, skilled at creatively using attacks like Cotton Spore, Bullet Seed and Pin Missile to both terrify and impress the audience and judges in Contests. When Harley once met with Team Rocket, his Cacturne was instantly attracted to Jessie and hugged her, accidentally sticking her with its spines.


== Swablu ==
Swablu (チルット, Chirutto, Tyltto in original Japanese language versions) is a birdlike Pokémon who has light and fluffy wings that are like cottony clouds. This Pokémon is not frightened of people. It lands on the heads of people and sits there like a cotton-fluff hat. It loves to make things clean and to this end, if it spots anything dirty, it will wipe and polish it with its cottony wings. If these wings become dirty, it will find a stream to shower itself. After enduring winter, in which little food is available, Swablu flocks move closer to towns in the spring.


== Altaria ==
Altaria (チルタリス, Chirutarisu, Tyltalis in original Japanese language versions) is a blue birdlike Pokémon with wings surrounded by cotton clouds. It carries a highly refined set of vocal cords for a Pokémon. It sings and trills beautiful melodies (which has been described as a gorgeous soprano) in its crystal-clear voice as its pastime in the mountains, making its listeners experience dreamy wonderment. Altaria also carries a flame sac within its body, which it uses to launches intensely hot fireballs from its mouth in self-defense from attackers. During migration, Altaria wheels through the sky among billowing, cotton-like clouds, supported by aerial updrafts in the sky that it catches with its buoyant wings in order to soar. In Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire, Altaria is capable of Mega Evolution, changing its type to Dragon/Fairy when it does.


== Zangoose ==
Zangoose (ザングース, Zangūsu) is a Pokémon that resembles a mix between a mongoose and a cat (it's described as a "Cat Ferret" on the Pokédex because it is not only based on both, but the Japanese translation for these words also comes out to "mongoose"). Although a quadruped, it can easily stand on two feet, usually done during battle. Zangoose's main means of defense are its agility and its sharp claws. Zangoose weighs 88.8 lbs and stands at a height of 4'03". Its speed is matched only by Scyther's. Many of the attacks a Zangoose learns naturally involve the use of its claws.
Zangoose is famous for its long-standing blood feud with Seviper, similar to that of a mongoose and a king cobra. The rivalry exist mainly because both Pokémon resemble these animals. Zangoose has feuded with Seviper for many generations and it automatically assumes Seviper to be an enemy by instinct. Despite this, a Zangoose and a Seviper are both in the Field egg group in the video games, meaning that they can breed together.
The Zangoose is a big, white, catlike creature with huge claws—purple or black, depending on the artist—and long, rabbit-like ears. Its fur is a milk white color—except for the red, scar-like markings on its face, chest, and forelegs. In the video games, it can be caught in Pokémon Ruby Version but not in Pokémon Sapphire Version. They appear in both Pokémon X and Pokémon Y but are more prevalent in X. The rules for this are as follows: in Pokémon X, a horde of Zangoose will have a Seviper in it, with the opposite being true in Pokémon Y. In this type of encounter, Zangoose and Seviper will ignore the player's Pokémon and attack the other species instead, though Leer will affect the player's Pokémon as normal. Once the single Seviper or Zangoose go down, the more numerous species will start attacking the player's Pokémon.


== Seviper ==
Seviper (ハブネーク, Habunēku, Habunake in original Japanese language versions) is fairly large viper Pokémon that is usually depicted scrunched up like an accordion. It is mostly deep purple in color, but has several markings on its body. Seviper has yellow hexagon markings that run from its head to their tail, small yellow bumps where they touch the ground to help with movement and various purple marks that resemble scars (which serve as a reminder of its long-running feud with Zangoose). Seviper has several different weapons it can use in battle, such as elongated red fangs that protrude from the mouth and a bladed tail with which it can use to swipe or stab. Prior to Generation IV, Seviper is the only known Pokémon that learns Poison Tail through leveling up. In a famous Trainer's Choice sequence (a hook around a commercial break) in the Pokémon Anime, it was stated that Arbok evolves into Seviper; this is not in the game or other canon work.
Seviper is forever the sworn enemy of Zangoose, and will fight it until the bitter end. A Seviper will counter against a Zangoose's agility with its sword-like tail, which carries a poisonous substance used to dispatch its enemies. This relationship with Zangoose is probably a reference to the rivalry between snakes and mongoose in the real world.
Seviper holds the distinction of being the only pure Poison-type to not have an evolutionary relative in the videogame, and one of two Poison-types in total to not have an evolutionary relative (Qwilfish [a Water/Poison type] is the other). It can only be caught in Pokémon Sapphire and Pokémon Emerald on Route 114. It can also be caught on Route 8 in the Kalos region: however, during a Horde encounter, Seviper will ignore the player's Pokémon and attack Zangoose instead (though Leer will affect the player's Pokémon as normal). They are more prevalent in Pokémon Y.
Pokémon Emerald‍ '​s Battle Pike building is shaped like a Seviper, referencing the Frontier Brain inside, Pike Queen Lucy. Along with Seviper, Lucy owns several snake-like Pokémon, such as Milotic and Steelix.


== Lunatone ==
Lunatone (ルナトーン, Runatōn) is a floating, sentient meteorite in the iconic shape of a crescent moon. Its body is a stone-like beige color, and it has two large, intimidating eyes, one on either side. It also has a quite odd, beak-like protuberance in the middle of the crescent.
Lunatone was first discovered forty years ago in Meteor Falls, a cave in Hoenn, its only known habitat. Meteor Falls, as its name suggests, is full of meteorites and the craters left by them as they impacted the planet's surface, suggesting Lunatone (and Solrock) as partners, have their origins in outer space. Lunatone is greatly connected to the moon, and its vitality is dependent on the lunar cycle. Lunatone's power and activity is greatest during the full moon, and weakest during the day and when the moon is unseen. Anyone who looks at its glowing red eyes is said to become transfixed with fear. In the Game Boy Advance Systems, it is only found in Pokémon Sapphire Version.


== Solrock ==
Solrock (ソルロック, Sorurokku) resembles a large orange spherical rock with yellow outgrowths all around its body and a pair of flat, textured eyes. The appearance of the Pokémon is the iconic shape of the sun.
Solrock, apparently a meteorite whose origins appear to be from outer space, is expressionless, yet is somewhat sentient. It was discovered along with Lunatone in Meteor Falls, a site where a rain of meteorites impacted the ground. The Pokémon's solar connections are apparent in battle: It absorbs solar power during the day and unleashes the sunlight as a concentrated beam of energy as its main weapon (compare with Venusaur). Because it also carries Psychic powers, Solrock can sense what its foes are thinking. Solrock and Lunatone are counterparts; Lunatone represents the moon, and Solrock represents the sun.
GamesRadar ranked Solrock second on their list of "Five Unintentionally Scary Pokémon", noting it has immobilizing fear with the black lines around its eyes resembling mascara.


== Barboach ==
Barboach (ドジョッチ, Dojotchi, Dojoach in original Japanese language versions) lives in muddy areas of riverbeds. It probes this mud with its whiskers before deciding where to bury itself underneath the level of the mud, so that it remains motionless while its top whiskers are poking above the surface. The whiskers act as a superb radar system in this position, for Barboach detects its prey in the area using its whiskers to sense disturbances in the air.
Barboach's body is covered with a slimy film, which is an important measure of discouraging both bacteria and predators from targeting Barboach. Whenever Barboach is partially submerged in mud, the film functions as a barrier to prevent germs in the mud from entering Barboach's otherwise thin, unprotected body. Also, if a predator attempts to grab it, the Pokémon effortlessly slips out of its grasp as if it were a bar of wet, flexible soap like the real world hagfish. It would seem that Barboach's body depends on keeping its slimy coating layer thick and fluid with the influence of muddy water because the Pokémon's body weakens if the coating dries up.


== Whiscash ==
Whiscash (ナマズン, Namazun in original Japanese language versions) is a catfish-like Pokémon. It has a dark-blue body, large round eyes, and thick light-blue lips, which usually form a smile. Attached on both cheeks are two long, yellow whiskers, which is why the Pokédex describes them as "Whiskers Pokémon". In its shiny version, Whiscash' belly and whiskers have turned dark red, and its body black.
Despite its benign appearance, Whiscash is an extremely violent and territorial Pokémon. It makes its nest at the bottom of ponds and hordes gold in a dragon like way or swamps, where it sleeps throughout the day. At night, it awakes, after which it will eat continually. Whiscash will easily claim a large pond or swamp as its exclusive territory. If an intruder approaches it, Whiscash will thrash about, triggering massive earthquakes with a radius of over three miles. Whiscash also has the ability to predict real earthquakes.
Whiscash, Namazun in the Japanese games, is based upon the Namazu ("catfish") in Japanese mythology. The creature lives in the mud beneath the earth, and is guarded by the god Kashima, who restrains the creature with a stone. If Kashima lets his guard fall however, Namazu will be set loose and cause earthquakes.
Whiscash has a mark similar to a "W" on its head.
In the spin-off games Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Red Rescue Team and Blue Rescue Team, and the related TV special Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Team Go-Getters Out Of The Gate!, Whiscash lives in his pond with a waterfall behind it, and tells old folk tales to others for amusement.


== Corphish ==
Corphish (ヘイガニ, Heigani in original Japanese language versions) is not indigenous to the Hoenn region, but to a landmass overseas (which is unknown). It was introduced to Hoenn as an exotic pet, but the species ended up familiarizing itself so much that it now forms part of the local ecosystem. Corphish is a hardy and durable Pokémon; it can thrive almost under any condition. It can make its nest even in polluted water, and it will make a meal out of anything available.
In the Pokémon anime, Corphish is one of the Pokémon that Ash has in his traveling team for the duration of Hoenn and the entire Battle Frontier challenge in Kanto. Corphish is friendly, but does not realize its own strength; it often ends up flinging Ash away while expressing its affection to him. Corphish is also short-tempered, and often tries to instigate a fight when peaceful solutions exist, and also gets jealous when one of Ash's Pokémon evolve, since it wants Ash's attention.
Corphish is also a member of Wigglytuff's Guild in the spin-off game Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, and has a habit of saying "Hey, hey, hey!"


== Crawdaunt ==
Crawdaunt (シザリガー, Shizarigā, Shizariger in original Japanese language versions) are tempestuous and destructive creatures; they will challenge intruders in their territory to battle whenever necessary. They use their claws to throw other Pokémon out of their ponds. Older Crawdaunt usually have many scars on their pincers from the battles in which they prevailed. Crawdaunt sheds its shell regularly; this leaves the exposed body vulnerable to attacks while the new shell is soft. In such a weakened condition, a Crawdaunt usually burrows into the bottom of its pond to avoid attacks from enemy Pokémon.


== Baltoy ==
Baltoy (ヤジロン, Yajiron, Yajilon in original Japanese language versions) is known as the "Clay Doll Pokémon." The first Baltoy seen by humans was discovered in ancient ruins. It moves around by spinning skillfully on its single foot, and is proficient in using Psychic-type moves. Its native habitat is the desert. Baltoy sleeps while balancing on its foot. When seeing other Baltoy, this Pokémon congregates with them and all members of the group begin crying in unison. The reason for the behavior is unknown, but it could be some form of communication. Baltoy can be encountered in the desert on Route 111.


== Claydol ==
Claydol (ネンドール, Nendōru, Nendoll in original Japanese language versions) is known as the "Clay Doll Pokémon." It is imbued with a high degree of telekinetic power. It is always using telekinesis to keep itself afloat above the surface of the ground, whether it is traveling, standing still, or even sleeping. Its screw-shaped arms are separate objects that are connected to its body through telekinesis, and they float around Claydol's body on Claydol's accord. In battle, it positions its arms out in front and shoots lateral beams at its targets. The species originates from a doll or a statue made of mud and clay by primitive humans—which was then brought to life by exposure to a mysterious ray. Some believe it can control the elements. In the Hoenn region video games, along with Altaria and Banette, Claydol can be encountered in the wild at the Sky Pillar. Claydol seems to be based on the Japanese dogu.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called Claydol "forgettable", due in part to its inability to use its types particularly well, adding that it being "creepy-looking probably doesn't help matters either".


== Lileep ==
Lileep (リリーラ, Rirīra, Lilyla in original Japanese language versions) became extinct approximately 100 million years before the beginning of the series, but due to scientific Advances Learning Center, can be resurrected from their fossils. They are an aquatic carnivorous species; they use their petal-like tentacles to catch slow prey and ingest it whole. Their coloring assists in this, as it resembles harmless seaweed. Although capable of movement, in the wild Lileep choose one location to stake out and stay there. It likely is meant to represent a Crinoid (Sea Lily), possibly providing the source of its name.


== Cradily ==
Cradily (ユレイドル, Yureidoru, Yuradle in original Japanese language versions) has been extinct for 100 million years before the series. It is brought back to life as a Lileep restored from fossils. Cradily is an aquatic creature that makes its nest in the shallows of warm seas. For this reason, when the tide goes out, Cradily can be seen on what are now wet beaches. In a particularly turbulent area of the sea shore, Cradily anchors itself to the sea floor with its heavy, particularly shaped lower body so as to prevent itself from being washed out to sea.
When hunting marine creatures, Cradily makes its way deeper into the ocean, dragging its heavy body along as its body's anchor-like composition prevents Cradily from floating off the sea floor and to the surface. When Cradily spots its prey, it extends its trunk-like neck and its eight tentacles to ensnare its target, where it uses powerful acid secreted in its tentacles to melt the prey before feeding.


== Anorith ==
Anorith (アノプス, Anopusu, Anopth in original Japanese language versions) is known as the "Old Shrimp Pokémon." Its many legs have reformed into "wings" along its side that enabled it to swim by undulating them in a fashion similar to a sting ray or trilobite. The forelimbs are claws which it uses to hunt prey. Anorith lived in warm seas millions of years ago. Anorith hunts its prey by stabbing it with its two front claws but, it might also paralyze the target with a blast of energy from its mouth. It bears similarities to, and might have taken part of its name from, Anomalocaris, a prehistoric arthropod.


== Armaldo ==
Armaldo (アーマルド, Āmarudo) was a Pokémon that lived in prehistoric times and became extinct soon afterwards, but it has been reincarnated through fossil-resurrection technology. Armaldo's armor is very tough, making many attacks against it seem to bounce off and giving t invulnerability to critical hits. The frontal claws are freely extendable and contractible, and the Pokémon can wield enough propulsional force in its claws to punch through a slab of steel. Armaldo prefers land as its residence and the ocean as its hunting ground. The beetle-like back-wings are used for swimming underwater, and its claws are used to skewer its prey before feeding.


== Feebas ==
Feebas (ヒンバス, Hinbasu, Hinbass in original Japanese language versions) is an aquatic Pokémon which can survive in both fresh and salt water thanks to its hardy nature. It prefers ponds that are filled with weeds. Feebas has an unattractive, shabby appearance and it looks weak and worthless, as its fins are ragged and tattered from the moment of its birth. It is hard to find, but it is an easy Pokémon to catch if encountered since it is slow and dimwitted, but not many people in the Pokémon world take the trouble to capture, study or raise it, as they find it a boring species (similarly to Magikarp from the first generation of Pokémon).
In the Pokémon games, Feebas is an exceptionally rare Pokémon, even in the area where it is found, because it appears only in six randomly determined tiles in Route 119, and these spots will change often, at the same time as the Dewford Town trendy phrase.
Usually Feebas will evolve into a Milotic when its beauty stat is sufficiently high or maxed out, but, as of Generation V, a Feebas holding a Prism Scale will evolve into a Milotic when traded. Recommended berries for blending beauty-enhancing Pokéblocks include Cornn, Hondew, Kelpsy, and most of all, Pamtre, which can only be obtained once from the Route 123 Berry Master's wife by telling her the phrase "CHALLENGE CONTEST".


== Milotic ==
Milotic (ミロカロス, Mirokarosu, Milokaross in original Japanese language versions) primarily live at the bottom of large lakes, suggesting that they have both lungs and gills. Because they are considered the most beautiful of all Pokémon, they have been depicted in paintings and statues. Milotic have the power to becalm such emotions as anger and hostility to quell bitter feuding. Those that see it are said to forget their combative spirits right away; in particularly strong cases of anger, however, a Milotic's body can glow a vivid pink and release a pulsing wave of energy that brings soothing calm to the restless spirits of the people and Pokémon involved.
The evolution of Feebas into Milotic is unique within the Pokémon video games, in that a Feebas will only evolve into Milotic when its Beauty condition is sufficiently high, although in Generation V, a Prism Scale held by a traded Feebas will also produce a Milotic. Gym Leader/Champion Wallace and Champion Cynthia own Milotic in the games, as does a Cool Trainer on Hoenn's Route 120. Then as well, Gym Leader Juan in the Hoenn region has a Milotic which he has a strong connection with because of its super move Recover.


== Castform ==
Castform (ポワルン, Powarun, Powalen in original Japanese language versions) is a small, rather unique Pokémon that resembles a cloud. It might be used like a satellite dish to sense upcoming weather changes. It is distinct from other Pokémon in that its water-like cellular structure is affected by the weather, to the extent that its type and appearance change in extreme conditions. In intense sunlight, Castform becomes a Fire-type Pokémon that resembles an orange, stylized sun sitting atop a white cloud; in the rain, it becomes a Water-type and looks like a water drop sitting on a gray cloud; and in hail, it turns purple and is encased in a green, tornado-shaped cloud: it also becomes an Ice type. In all other weather conditions, Castform retains its original typing and appearance. Castform's mood is also influenced by the weather.
Like Porygon's evolutionary line and Mewtwo, Castform is a Pokémon that was created in a laboratory. It was created by the researchers of the Weather Institute in the Hoenn region as an experiment in weather forecast and manipulation. Its man-made nature is reflected in its uniform base 70 stats.
Castform can naturally learn three weather moves which changes the typing of Castform and Weather Ball: Sunny Day (fire), Rain Dance (water), and Hail (ice). It will become the type of the move, (having the same weaknesses and resistances), and Weather Ball will do that type damage. It can also learn, by using a TM, Sandstorm (either an enemy can perform this attack in battle to transform Castform). While Castform will not transform into a Rock type during a Sandstorm, Weather Ball will do Rock-type damage. In Pokémon XD: Gale of Darkness, if Shadow Sky is used, Castform doesn't change, but its Weather Ball damage is identical to Shadow Pokémon moves having no weakness or resistance.


== Kecleon ==
Kecleon (カクレオン, Kakureon in original Japanese language versions) possesses the ability to change its body coloration at will in order to blend with its surroundings, approaching invisibility. Kecleon puts this stealthy trait to good use when hunting, as it can sneak up on its prey undetected and trap it with its long and stretchy tongue. Kecleon does not have absolute control of its appearance, however: it can never change the color of the zigzag band in the middle of its body, which renders his cloaking useless to any fairly keen observer. Secondly, a Kecleon can involuntarily shift colors based on its emotions, so that a sudden mood swing will change its looks completely. Finally, a Kecleon will revert to its original colors if it is startled. In the video games, Kecleon's unique Color Change ability changes its type to match that of the last damage-dealing attack that hit it.
In the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon series, there are two Kecleon who own their items shop and they are known as the Kecleon duo. One has an original color which is initially green and another is purple. Strangely, this is different from Kecleon's shiny sprite. Kecleon also maintain stores inside selected dungeons where they are interacted by taking or placing items on the store's platform. Their dungeon stores can be stolen from, but doing so will cause Kecleon to attack and call for reinforcements, which are all at double speed and have artificially inflated stats. However, the Trawl Orb item, when used right next to the stairs, allows the player to collect all of Kecleon's items and flee before Kecleon has a chance to react. Kecleon have the lowest recruitment rate of all Pokémon, -33.9% (first series) and -49.5% (its sequel).


== Shuppet ==
Shuppet (カゲボウズ, Kagebōzu, Kagebouzu in original Japanese language versions) are nocturnal entities that feed on feelings of envy, vengeance, malice, and other negative emotions. They are able to capture negative feelings in the atmosphere by channeling them into its horn. The captured energy is used by Shuppet as sustenance, allowing it to grow. At the same time, the projected person feels much better as his negative emotions leave him. These Pokémon are therefore attracted to people who hold negative emotions, and are known to roam cities in the night in search of such grudges. If someone develops especially strong feelings of vengeance, Shuppet can group in a swarm to line up beneath the eaves of that person's home.


== Banette ==
Banette (ジュペッタ, Jupetta, Jupetta in original Japanese language versions) are said to come from plush toys that were thrown away, similar to how Grimer and Koffing are formed by industrial waste. Shuppet possesses a discarded doll, growing into and forming Banette. It is also said that Banette live in garbage dumps or back alleys and wander around looking for the children that disposed of them. Each Banette is filled with strong feelings of hate, which it expresses by laying powerful curses. It gains power to cast those curses by sticking pins into its own body, turning itself into a voodoo doll. Banette's weakness lies in that its vital force is artificial, since it is an inanimate object infused with a cursed energy. This energy can be removed and effectively exorcized by forcing its zipper-like mouth open.
Banette gains a Mega Evolution in Pokémon X/Y.
In the anime Harley owns a Banette.
IGN editor "Pokémon of the Day Chick" called it the "coolest Ghost type ever", as well as her personal favourite. She added that its concept is cool, stating that "she's a haunted doll; what's not to love?".


== Duskull ==
Duskull (ヨマワル, Yomawaru in original Japanese language versions) is a nocturnal Pokémon that wanders through darkness. With the abilities to turn invisible and pass through walls, it can easily sneak up on prey and pursue it anywhere. It gives up at sunrise if the chase lasts that long. Stories of the species are told to the misbehaving children by their mothers in the Pokémon world; they are told that they will be spirited away by Duskull if they receive scoldings from their mothers. In Pokémon Platinum version, Hearthome City's Gym Leader, Fantina, has a Duskull on her team.


== Dusclops ==
Dusclops (サマヨール, Samayōru, Samayouru in original Japanese language versions) is said to be like a black hole: it absorbs matter into its body, through its unseen mouth, never releasing the matter. What happens to the absorbed matter is unknown; theories suggest that inside Dusclops' body is a spectral ball of fire, though it cannot be confirmed. Dusclops also possesses the gift of hypnosis; it can control other conscious beings. It sways the victim into hypnosis by waving its hands and gazing into the victim's eyes.
Dusclops has very high defenses, but its low Attack stat forces it to rely on Toxic, Will-o-wisp, or Night Shade to damage its enemies.


== Tropius ==
Tropius (トロピウス, Toropiusu) live in the jungles of the southern tropics. It is a 'frugivore', thriving on fruit. It is theorized that Tropius's love of fruit eventually resulted in the species incorporating fruit as part of its very anatomy. It may also be that Tropius eats so much fruit that it gets an excess of vitamins and minerals, so it grows fruit to get rid of excess nutrients. Bunches of banana-like fruit can be seen growing under a Tropius's neck. These fruit are deliciously sweet and particularly popular among the children in south tropical villages, who eat it as snacks. Tropius also has broad leaves on its back, which, if flapped hard enough, can be used as wings, enabling this bulky Pokémon to fly.
Because Tropius can learn Fly, Strength, Rock Smash, and Cut, it is a popular HM slave.


== Chimecho ==
Chimecho (チリーン, Chirīn, Chirean in original Japanese language versions) is known as the "Wind Chime Pokémon." Chimecho's light frame and its psychic powers enable it to freely fly around, especially during the hot season. If a Chimecho wishes to remain in one place for a while, it employs its suction cup to affix itself on trees or the eaves of a building. Chimecho has the distinctive ability to produce a ringing cry, the volume of which is amplified inside its hollow head and comes out as a chiming sound. A Chimecho can produce seven different tones to communicate various messages to its kindred. If threatened, Chimecho can use its cries as a defensive weapon, turning them into ultrasonic waves that knock its foes back. Chimecho can use seven different cries to knock out its prey.


== Absol ==
Absol (アブソル, Abusoru) is known as the "Disaster Pokémon" because it appears before natural disasters such as earthquakes and tidal waves. It lives in the rugged mountains, and only leaves to warn people of natural disasters with its innate ability to sense them through subtle changes in the environment. People often accuse Absol of causing the disasters themselves, resulting in its reputation as a doom-bringer, an example of killing the messenger. In X and Y, when Diantha battles against Magnus, his Absol lost. Absol gains a Mega Evolution in X and Y, growing a more curved horn, longer tail, and "scruffy piky pointy wings."
Official Nintendo Magazine readers voted Absol the best third generation Pokémon. Some video game critics found Absol's appearance "creepy". Game Informer thought Absol's Mega Evolution was a praiseworthy improvement, and GamesTM compared its appearance to the characters of My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic.


== Wynaut ==
Wynaut (ソーナノ, Sōnano, Sohnano in original Japanese language versions) is the pre-evolved form of Wobbuffet. Wynaut is always seen with a big, happy smile on its face, regardless of what its actual mood is. To determine its real mood Pokémon Trainers must look at a Wynaut's tail. If it can be seen slapping its tail on the ground continuously, it can be presumed that it is in an angry temperament. Wynaut travel in packs, in which the individuals often run into each other to toughen up. The thing that makes Wynaut stand out in front of others is the big bump in front of its head, and the lump moves behind its head when it evolves into Wobbuffet.


== Snorunt ==
Snorunt (ユキワラシ, Yukiwarashi in original Japanese language versions) live in icy dark caves and enjoys crying out to hear its own echo. Its diet consists solely of snow and ice. Old folklore claims a house visited by Snorunt is sure to prosper for many generations to come. It generally moves in groups of five Snorunt, and they hide away during the hot seasons of Summer and Spring. Being an Ice-type, Snorunt can withstand temperatures of up to negative 150 degrees. Also, it has the peculiar ability to make Winter come early. A Snorunt typically evolves into a Glalie at level 42, but if a player uses a Dawn Stone on a female Snorunt, it will evolve into a Froslass.
In the Pokémon anime, Snorunt is Ash Ketchum's fifth Pokémon from the Hoenn region. It has a powerful Ice Beam, though this is hindered by Snorunt's bad aim. Because of this, Ash constantly trains it to try to improve its use of the technique. Snorunt eventually evolves into Glalie while fighting Team Rocket.


== Glalie ==
Glalie (オニゴーリ, Onigōri, Onigohri in original Japanese language versions) is known as the "Face Pokémon." It has a rock body it reinforces with a layer of diamond-like ice crystals that will not melt, even under fire. It has the ability to freely control ice by freezing moisture in any shape it wishes. It uses this to instantly freeze enemies and eat them at its leisure.
In the anime, Ash Ketchum has a Glalie while in Hoenn. It evolves from his Snorunt, and he keeps it throughout the season. Later, he leaves it at Professor Oak's lab upon returning from Hoenn.
GameDaily ranked Glalie fifth on their list of the "Top 10 Weirdest Looking Pokémon", noting it "resembles a cat wearing a skull, or a cat with aspirations of being a goalie". GamesRadar named Glalie on their list of Fugly Pokémon, noting it resembles a dirty snowball crossed with an evil cat head.
Glalie gains a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.


== Spheal ==
Spheal (タマザラシ, Tamazarashi in original Japanese language versions) is a spherical creature that rolls across ice floes because its body is not apt for swimming. Spheal, in spite of its infancy, is fully capable of living in Arctic-like environments. Although it is not obvious, its body is fully covered in a layer of plushy fur that feels fluffy to the touch. This is surprisingly good at insulating Spheal against the cold when it is rolling about on ice floes or diving into the sea, for it apparently never feels the cold at all. When groups of Spheal eat, they instinctively show their pleasure by clapping and making other noises, which is why it is known as the Clap Pokémon.


== Sealeo ==
Sealeo (トドグラー, Todogurā, Todoggler in original Japanese language versions) lives in herds among the ice floes of Arctic regions, and these herds consist of both itself and its other evolutionary forms Spheal and Walrein. It is a water and ice type. Its flippers are quite powerful: they are strong enough to shatter ice with well-placed flaps. Five times a day, Sealeo dives into the sea to hunt prey.
Sealeo's behavior revolves mostly around its sensitive nose; Sealeo uses it to investigate new things. It lifts new objects up with its nose, and rolls them around. While rolling an object, Sealeo checks the object's aroma and texture in order to learn about it. This is what it does to differentiate food from anything else, making it a vital ability for survival. However, Sealeo enjoy rolling any round objects around on their noses, including its pre-evolution, Spheal.


== Walrein ==
Walrein (トドゼルガ, Todozeruga, Todoseruga in original Japanese language versions) is among the few fully evolved Pokémon that live in functional communities, down in glacial environments, made of members of its pre-evolved forms Spheal and Sealeo as well as itself. Although it evolves from Seal Pokémon, it is more like a walrus than its pre-evolutions. The Walrein are the dominant members of their society, protecting their groups from attackers with their large strong tusks. These tusks are strong enough to thoroughly shatter blocks of ice weighing ten tons. When alone in the Arctic seas, Walrein's thick blubber insulates it from the extreme cold of sub-zero temperature water, and it uses its tusks to clear its way as it swims through ice floes. The blubber is also resilient enough to make enemy attacks such as bites bounce off relatively harmlessly.


== Clamperl ==
Clamperl (パールル, Pāruru, Pearlulu in original Japanese language versions) is protected by a sturdy shell. Once in a lifetime, it makes a magnificent pearl. This pearl, created upon evolution, is said to be infused with a mysterious energy and is used by Spoink as a focus for its psychic abilities (A symbiotic behavior similar to that of Mantine and Remoraid or Shellder and Slowpoke). Clamperl grows while being protected by its rock-hard shell. When its body becomes too large to fit inside the shell, it is sure evidence that it is getting close to evolution. However its shell is not only good for protection—it is also used for clamping and catching prey. A fully grown Clamperl's shell will be scored with nicks and scratches all over.
Clamperl first appeared in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, and can evolve into two different forms through trading via the Game Boy Advance's Game Link Cable, depending on which of two different items it is holding-Gorebyss with the Deepseascale, or Huntail with the Deepseatooth. One of these items are chosen by the player by Captain Stern after you give him the item "Scanner" found on the Abandoned Ship.


== Huntail ==
Huntail (ハンテール, Hantēru) went mostly unnoticed because it lives at extreme depths of the sea. Huntail's body is built to withstand the adverse living conditions in the deep sea that challenge even the best-made human craft. The water pressure is high enough to be labeled crushing, but Huntail withstands it by having a body with a very thick and sturdy spine. Its eyes are suited for life far under the sea as well; they can see clearly even in the murky dark depths of the ocean. Huntail carries bioluminescence, which it uses when hunting prey. It lights up the eye-like textures on its tail and wiggles it to deceive prey into thinking they have found a fish to eat. Then Huntail attacks and attempts to swallow the prey whole with its gaping mouth. It prefers smaller prey since its body and stomach are rather thin.
A GamesRadar editor stated that she likes Huntail and called it "creepy".


== Gorebyss ==
Gorebyss (サクラビス, Sakurabisu, Sakurabyss in original Japanese language versions) inhabits the southern seas at extreme depths. Its body is deceptively durable, so as to withstand the extreme hydrostatic pressures exercised to it at such a depth. Gorebyss's elegant form is exquisite to behold while swimming. Gorebyss uses its thin mouth to pick at seaweed growing between rocks, but it can also use it in a much more sinister fashion. When hunting live prey, it sticks its mouth into the prey's body and proceeds to drain it of all bodily fluids. After it feeds in this way, its body turns a more vivid pink.


== Relicanth ==
Relicanth (ジーランス, Jīransu, Glanth in original Japanese language versions) is a rare but accessible Pokémon, as it inhabits the deep ocean floor. Once thought to be extinct, it was discovered in an exploration mission of the sea abyss. Relicanth proved to be extremely well adapted to its environment; so much so, that according to researchers in the Pokémon world, it has not changed form in 100,000,000 years. Relicanth's body is covered in rock-like scales which are tough enough to withstand the enormous hydrostatic pressures exercised on it at such extreme depths, as is the case with other dwellers of the abyss. It uses its multiple pectoral fins as a means of locomotion across the sea bed. It is based on the real fish, the Coelacanth.


== Luvdisc ==

Luvdisc (ラブカス, Rabukasu, Lovecus in original Japanese language versions) lives on masses in shallow seas in the tropics. Luvdisc nests in both coral reefs and the branches of the coral-like Corsola Pokémon. During the spawning season, countless Luvdisc congregate at coral reefs, turning the waters pink. Luvdisc are said to shoot water at other Luvdisc to show a sign of love. It is a long held custom to give a Luvdisc to someone to express feelings of love. The Japanese name is a portmanteau of "Love" and "Discus", after the discus fish. Trainers value Luvdisc not for their combat abilities, but as a source of Heart Scales, the only payment accepted by Hoenn's Move Tutor.
Kat Bailey (IGN) noted Luvdisc as the worst Pokémon design introduced in Ruby and Sapphire. Other video game critics agreed that the character is "useless" in battle and was lazily designed, among the worst in the franchise. The Huffington Post‍ '​s Taylor Casti suggested that the game's designers ran out of ideas and "someone just drew a heart". IGN's Bailey wrote that Luvdisc "deserves to remain the butt of every Pokémon joke for the rest of time".


== Bagon ==
Bagon (タツベイ, Tatsubei, Tatsubay in original Japanese language versions) is a small blue reptilian Pokémon. Bagon is classified as the Rock Head Pokémon. They are bipedal and are entirely tailless and wingless. Despite being wingless, Bagon harbor a never-ending dream of being able to fly and can often be seen slamming their heads against huge rocks and throwing themselves off cliffs. As a result of their failed attempts at flying, Bagons' heads have grown harder than tempered steel. Bagon resembles a humanoid lizard Pokémon. It is a dragon type Pokémon. Bagon is a slow exp type. It is very hard to catch it. It stands at two feet tall, the same height as Charmander, and it weighs 92.8 lbs.
In the Hoenn region, Bagon are found in the depths of Meteor Falls, on the small patch of land where TM02 Dragon Claw is found.


== Shelgon ==
Shelgon (コモルー, Komorū, Komoruu in original Japanese language versions) cells are continually changing to prepare for evolution into Salamence. Even though this Pokémon's shell is heavy, it makes up for it by drawing in its stubby legs and rolling around. This shell is very thick and strong, similar to bones. The shell protects disruption of its internal cell development. When it is finally ready for evolution, its shell sheds instantly. While in this stage of its evolution, Shelgon fasts in order to grow hardier from hunger. It grows tired easily due to its lack of food and its heavy shell weighing it down.


== Salamence ==
Salamence (ボーマンダ, Bōmanda, Bohmander), known as the Dragon Pokémon, evolves from Shelgon when it gains enough experience from battle. They are large quadrupedal dragons with blue skin and large, red wings. Salamence longed for these wings ever since it was a young Bagon. Because of its powerful desire for wings, it eventually obtained them through evolution. It expresses the joy of having wings by flying around the sky shooting flames. Salamence are not always happy, and can rampage out of control when angered. While rampaging, it burns everything, and claws it to shreds.
Salamence was obtainable at a Nintendo promotional event in which it was given out to players. In the anime, Salamence was first seen in the Pokémon movie, Jirachi: Wish Maker. It is later seen being used by Silver from Pokémon Chronicles, Drake of the Elite Four, and J. In Pokémon Adventures, the character Ruby battled a Salamence that attacked him and Sapphire while the two were playing outside. After being defeated by Ruby, the Salamence went on a rampage and destroyed a lab, freeing Rayquaza, which was in captivity at that time. This resulted in Norman being banned from the Gym Leader test for seven years. This encounter changed both Ruby and Sapphire, causing Ruby to battle less, and Sapphire to battle more.
Salamence gains a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.


== Beldum ==
Beldum (ダンバル, Danbaru, Dumbbell in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon found in a swarm on Route 228. It lacks a circulatory system of blood. Instead, it is powered by a strong magnetic force. It can exert magnetic forces from its body in order to communicate with others of its species, and can even communicate with brain waves. Beldum move together in a synchronized pattern, attracted by the magnetism of one another. They can repel Earth's natural magnetism with their own, allowing them to levitate. Beldum live on cliffs by planting their leg into the cliff-rock. Steven leaves one as a gift in his house in Mossdeep City, after the player finishes the game.
In the anime, a Beldum is owned by the rival trainer Morrison, in the episode "Less is Morrison". It was defeated by Ash's Pikachu.


== Metang ==
Metang (メタング, Metangu) is formed from two Beldum merging to form a Metang (although there is no visible evidence of this in either the anime or the video games. In the only anime episode to date showing a Beldum evolution, Saved by the Beldum, when Morrison's Beldum evolves into Metang, it "creates" another Beldum and newly developed main body to evolve, instead of fusing with another Beldum. Likewise, if a Metang evolution is shown, it is highly unlikely it would involve two Metang evolving together). Both Beldums' brains in a Metang are linked by a network of magnetic impulses, making Metang quite intelligent. The Beldum only manifest as the arms and eyes of the Metang; some other material must make up the head. With both Beldums' magnetic fields combined, Metang's abilities manifest as telekinesis. Its telekinetic power allows it to hover a short distance above the ground, as well as fly at speeds of up to 60 miles per hour.
Metang doesn't rely entirely on its magnetic telekinesis, however, as it already has a portion of the durability and strength of Metagross, and can survive everything from collisions to plane crashes to explosions. Metang's claws can rip through tempered steel.


== Metagross ==
Metagross (メタグロス, Metagurosu) is formed by two Metang joining together. Each leg is the body of a former Beldum, and its head/body is the four collective heads of Beldum used to fuse into it. Metagross's intelligence is extraordinarily high: not only does it have four minds, but they are also connected by a highly complex neural network, which is nowadays a more accurate measure of the capacity for intelligence than the net amount of brain tissue. Its developed cerebral powers are said to surpass even those of a supercomputer, making it superintelligent on par with Alakazam from Generation I. Metagross mostly relies on its massive strength. It can also use psychic abilities, including the ability to render its massive body airborne by telekinesis once it draws its legs together (Magnet Rise). This Pokémon lives in mountainous areas. It can easily live comfortably on very steep slopes by planting its legs into rock or ground. According to the 3rd Generation games' data, Metagross is also a brutal predator. When hunting, it pins its prey to the ground under its massive body. It then eats the helpless victim using its large mouth on its underside.
Metagross gains a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.
Metagross makes an appearance in Super Smash Bros. Brawl and Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U as a Poké Ball Pokémon and a trophy. When released, it uses the move Earthquake, sending opponents flying, or driving them into the ground.
Official Nintendo Magazine named Metagross one of the ten best Pokémon in the game as of 2010, stating it "when it comes to getting the job done you can't question its ability".


== Regirock ==
Regirock (レジロック, Rejirokku) is a legendary Pokémon in Pokémon Ruby, Sapphire, and Emerald that can only be caught in the Desert Ruins once in each game. It was sealed there long before the series. It can also be found inside of a cave in Pokémon Ranger. It was obtainable in Platinum at the cave just south of Stark Mountain only if the special Regigigas from the eleventh movie event was transferred to the Platinum game. Regirock is also obtainable in Black 2 and White 2 in an underground tunnel. Being made completely out of rock, it has no brain or heart, which baffles the scientists of the Pokémon universe as to how it can survive without them. Regirock along with its brothers Regice and Registeel often fill guardian roles; they are normally guarding their king, Regigigas, but they also have been seen at The Tree of Beginning, and guarding Mew. The various rocks that it is composed of come from different locations. If damaged in battle, it will repair itself with rocks it finds nearby. Regirock, along with the other Regis, is used by Pyramid King Brandon in Pokémon Emerald and in the anime adaption. A second set of Regis appear in Lucario and the Mystery of Mew. Regirock has a colossal base 200 Defense.


== Regice ==
Regice (レジアイス, Rejiaisu) is a legendary Pokémon in Pokémon Ruby, Sapphire and Pokémon Emerald that can only be caught in the Island Cave once in each game. It can also be found inside a cave in Pokémon Ranger. It was obtainable in Pokémon Platinum at the Mt. Coronet exit at Route 216 only if the special Regigigas from the eleventh movie event was transferred to the Platinum game. Regice is also obtainable in Black 2 and White 2 in an underground tunnel; however, it is only available by default in White 2, and the Iceberg Key used to unlock its area must be sent using the Unova Link feature for Black 2 players to encounter it. Regice's body was made during an ice age. Scientists have discovered that the ice on Regice's body is the same ice found in the South Pole. It cannot be melted, even if hit by fire or placed in magma. It also controls air of -328 degrees Fahrenheit (-164.4 degrees Celsius.) At base 200, Regice's Special Defense is the second highest among all Pokémon, losing only to Shuckle's 230.


== Registeel ==
Registeel (レジスチル, Rejisuchiru) is a legendary Pokémon in Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire and Pokémon Emerald that can only be caught in the Ancient Tomb once in each game. It can also be found inside a cave in Pokémon Ranger. It was obtainable in Pokémon Platinum On Iron Island only if the special Regigigas from the eleventh movie event was transferred to the Platinum game. Registeel is also obtainable in Black 2 and White 2 in an underground tunnel; however, it is only available by default in Black 2, and the Iron Key used to unlock its area must be sent using the Unova Link feature for White 2 players to encounter it. It has a hollow body made out of a mysterious metal that is harder than any metal on Earth, yet very flexible and able to shrink and stretch accordingly. This is from being underground for tens of thousands of years. No one, not even scientists, has any idea what Registeel eats or if it eats at all. Registeel has incredible base 150 Special Defense and Defense in Pokémon Emerald.


== Latias ==

Latias (ラティアス, Ratiasu), known as the Eon Pokémon, first appeared as a central character in the film Pokémon Heroes, along with its counterpart, Latios. They later appeared in the video games Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, roaming around after the player beats the Elite Four. This similarly happens in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver. Latias is highly intelligent and can understand human speech. She can telepathically communicate with others. If Latias senses hostility towards herself, she will ruffle the feathers all over her body and cry shrilly to intimidate her foe. However, she will usually disappear if she senses an enemy, as they are able to use a form of active camouflage by enfolding their bodies with their glass-like coat of down and refracting light in unique ways, allowing them to become invisible or even take on the appearance of a human. Latias and Latios are both incredibly difficult to hunt down and catch without the aid of a Master Ball.
Both Latias & Latios gain a Mega Evolution in Omega Ruby/Alpha Sapphire, the remake of Gen III games.


== Latios ==

Latios (ラティオス, Ratiosu), known as the Eon Pokémon, first appeared as a central character in the film Pokémon Heroes, along with its counterpart, Latias. They later appeared in the video games Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, roaming around after the player beats the Elite Four. This similarly happens in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver. Latios is able to fold in his arms and fly at the speed of a jet. He can make foes see images he has seen or what he imagines in his head. He can understand human speech. Even if he is hiding, Latios can detect the locations and emotions of others using telepathy. Latios has a very protective nature, especially towards his relative, Latias. He has a docile temperament and dislikes fighting. He will open his heart if he finds a Trainer with a compassionate spirit.


== Kyogre ==
Kyogre (カイオーガ, Kaiōga, Kaiorga) is one of the Weather Trio of legendary Pokémon, alongside Groudon and Rayquaza. Kyogre represents Pokémon Sapphire and appears on the cover art for the game. Kyogre represents the primal force of the oceans; as such, it has the power to bring forth storms, constant rain and massive floods. It is part of the creation myth of the Pokémon world. According to legend, a titanic battle between it and Groudon created the oceans and the land, and the two were sealed beneath their respective elements. It is a Water-type with the ability Drizzle, which makes the weather rainy until another weather move is used, a Pokémon with another weather altering ability is switched in, or five turns pass (as of Pokémon X and Y).
In Pokémon Sapphire, Team Aqua tries to awaken and control Kyogre. It is awakened by a Red orb that the group actively seeks. They eventually awaken Kyogre, but they are stopped by the player in the video game. Kyogre made its first movie appearance in the ninth Pokémon movie, Pokémon Ranger and the Temple of the Sea. In the movie, Kyogre helps Ash, May, Pikachu, and Manaphy protect the Sea Temple and defeat The Phantom. Kyogre has also made appearances in the series, in the episodes "Gaining Groudon" and "The Scuffle of Legends."
Kyogre is a Poké Ball Pokémon in the non-Pokémon-exclusive games Super Smash Bros. Brawl and for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. If the player releases Kyogre from a Poké Ball, the opponents are blasted with Hydro Pump, pushing them off the screen. This water does not harm the one who sent it out and anyone on their team (If team mode is on). If the opponent touches Kyogre, however, the opponent will receive damage.
In Pokémon Ranger, it serves as an additional boss when water Pokémon wreak havoc in a city. Also, it appears as an additional boss in all Pokémon Mystery Dungeon games, on B40F of Stormy Sea in the Rescue Team series, and as the guardian of the Aqua-Monica on B50F of the Bottomless Sea in the Explorers series.
In contrast to Mega Evolution, Kyogre and Groudon are capable of reverting to their ancient selves, a process known as Primal Reversion. Primal Kyogre was also revealed as the version legendary of Pokémon Alpha Sapphire, which will be released worldwide on November 2014.


== Groudon ==
Groudon (グラードン, Gurādon) is one of a trio of legendary Pokémon, alongside Rayquaza and Kyogre, that represents Pokémon Ruby and appears on its cover art. In the legend surrounding the three, Groudon represents the land, while Kyogre and Rayquaza represent the sea and the sky, respectively. Groudon, representing land, raised lands and expanded continents in legends and myths. Coming as a savior for humans suffering from floods caused by Kyogre, it can dissipate clouds, and evaporate water with light and heat. After a titanic battle with Kyogre, it went to sleep in underground magma, causing volcanoes to erupt when it awakes. It is a Ground-type with the Drought ability, which makes the weather sunny until another weather move is used or a Pokémon with another weather-altering ability is switched in. Primal Groudon gains the Fire type upon reversion. At 2094.1 lbs, Groudon is the heaviest of all known Pokémon.
Groudon first appears in Pokémon Ruby, Sapphire, and Emerald together with Kyogre and Rayquaza – the three are known as the Weather Trio. Pokémon Ruby focuses on Team Magma awakening Groudon to take over the world with a Blue Orb, while Pokémon Emerald has both Groudon and Kyogre awake. The anime follows a similar structure, where both Pokémon are awakened, and forced to battle by Team Magma and Team Aqua. This is foiled by Ash Ketchum and Lance, and Groudon and Kyogre return to their respective elements after calling a truce. Groudon also plays a pseudo-role in the sixth Pokémon movie, Jirachi Wishmaker, where an evil being in the form of a Groudon is formed from the energy of Jirachi.
Groudon appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a Pokémon that can be released from a Poké Ball thrown by the player. In the game, any player (except the one who threw the Poké Ball containing it) that touches Groudon will burst into flames and take high amounts of damage. It also appears in the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon games. In the Red and Blue Rescue Team games, it kidnaps Alakazam's rescue team and the hero and their partner must defeat Groudon to rescue Alakazam and his partners Charizard and Tyranitar. In the Explorers of Time, Darkness, and Sky games, it appears as an illusion created by Uxie to scare off intruders (such as the hero and his/her partner) from the Fogbound Lake and protect the Time Gear hidden there. The real Groudon is the boss of Shimmer Desert, and guards the Terra Cymbal.
In contrast to Mega Evolution, Kyogre and Groudon are capable of reverting to their ancient selves, a process known as Primal Reversion. Primal Groudon was also revealed as the version legendary of Pokémon Omega Ruby, which will be released worldwide on November 2014.


== Rayquaza ==

Rayquaza is a dragon/flying pokemon which is legendery found in sky tower in pokemon emerald. in the newer games pokemon omega ruby and alpha sapphire Rayquaza can mega evolve and become the strongest pokemon right now in Pokemon. Rayquaza's normal form's abilty is air lock which makes there be no special weather condition countering the others in it's trio's ability and in rayquaza's Mega form it gets a new abilty named delta stream which gets rid of all its weaknesses from its flying typing and doing the exact same as air lock. And it needs the move dragon ascent to mega evolve and it doesnt need a mega stone. The move dragon Acsent has 120 power and is flying type and lowers defence and special defence.


== Jirachi ==
Jirachi (ジラーチ, Jirāchi) a legendary Pokémon that first appeared in a download from a Nintendo GameCube bonus disc that was distributed to players who pre-ordered Pokémon Colosseum in the US and allowed players do download Jirachi to their Nintendo games, Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire. It possesses telepathic and telekinetic abilities, including the ability to levitate. Jirachi hibernates for periods of one thousand years in a crystalline cocoon. When it wakes up, it grants wishes for a week. If it is ever in danger, it will fight its attacker, but not awaken from its slumber. After one thousand years have elapsed, Jirachi awakens from its sleep for one week if it is sung to in a pure voice. During this period, it is able to grant wishes. If a message is inscribed onto one of the "tags" on Jirachi's head, it will fulfill those wishes. After it fulfills the wishes, Jirachi returns to hibernation in a newly formed cocoon, waiting another thousand years for its next master's wish. Jirachi's signature move is Doom Desire, a more powerful Steel-type version of Future Sight.
Jirachi are given away every year in celebration of Tanabata.
Jirachi is one of the primary characters of the sixth Pokémon Movie, Jirachi Wish Maker. Tomiko Suzuki, in her final role, portrayed the character in the original Japanese version. Jirachi awakens for seven days, awaiting a wish to be granted. It soon befriends Max, and travels with him until it is used to create an evil being in the form of a Groudon. It absorbs the power used to create the beast, and returns to sleep.
Jirachi also appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl, as a Pokémon that can be released from a Pokéball. It will drop stickers on the stage before disappearing. After the fight ends, a screen will show up that says that you have seen Jirachi for the first time if, during the game, you have never sent out Jirachi before. It will then give you a trophy in the trophy room. It is voiced in Super Smash Bros. Brawl by Mayumi Iizuka and Michele Knotz.


== Deoxys ==


== References ==