Major and recurring characters from the military science fiction series StarCraft are listed below, organised by respective species and most commonly affiliated faction within the fictional universe. The story of the StarCraft series revolves around interstellar affairs in a distant sector of the galaxy, where three species are vying for supremacy: the Terrans, a highly factionalised future version of humanity, the Protoss, a theocratic race of vast psionic ability; and the Zerg, an insectoid species commanded by a hive mind persona. The latter two of these species were genetically engineered by the Xel'Naga, a fourth species believed extinct. The series was begun with Blizzard Entertainment's 1998 video game StarCraft, and has been expanded with sequels Insurrection, Retribution, Brood War, Ghost, Wings of Liberty, Heart of the Swarm, and Legacy of the Void. The franchise has been further extended with a series of novels, graphic novels and other works.


== Casting and designEdit ==

The characters and story of the StarCraft series were created by Chris Metzen and James Phinney. However, as Phinney was not involved in StarCraft: Brood War, Chris Metzen alone is credited for the development of the plot in the expansion. Despite the series success globally, particularly in South Korea, Blizzard Entertainment has not made any major comments regarding the development of the characters and the storyline of the StarCraft series.
However, interviews with the two of the voice actors have given a glimpse into small parts of the development process. An interview with Robert Clotworthy, the voice of Jim Raynor in all released StarCraft games to date, has revealed that for the most part the voicing for the characters was done over only a few days in sessions of up to four hours, a fact mirrored in a similar interview with Sarah Kerrigan's actress, Glynnis Talken Campbell. Clotworthy also stated how the concept art for the game usually used for the visual development of characters and locales in games was used by him in order to develop the personality of his character.
Visually, most of the characters and units in the games were developed from artwork by Metzen and Samwise Didier, although at least two other artists—Glenn Rane and Peter Lee—have developed concept art for StarCraft II. It is also implied by some of the authors of the novels that the development of the characters in their books was influenced by Metzen as well as Andy Chambers and Evelyn Fredericksen. This is particularly notable for characters later appearing in the games, such as Valerian Mengsk.


== Terran charactersEdit ==


=== Raynor's RaidersEdit ===


==== Jim RaynorEdit ====

Jim Raynor is the primary Terran protagonist in the StarCraft series, and the ubiquitous character of the series, having participated in all critical military conflicts in the sector, except one. He is also the only character to have established inter-species alliance. The character is voiced by Robert Clotworthy.
A former colonial marshal on the backwater planet of Mar Sara, Raynor joins Arcturus Mengsk's revolutionaries in their fight against the tyrannical and corrupt Confederacy of Man, where he develops a relationship with Sarah Kerrigan, Mengsk's second in command. However, he quickly comes to realise that Mengsk is far from the force for good when he abandons Kerrigan and the entire population of a planet to die by the hand of the Zerg to satisfy his own thirst for power. Disillusioned and embittered, Raynor deserts Mengsk and becomes a persona non grata in the new Terran Dominion. The situation gets no better when Kerrigan, who was captured by the Zerg, is assimilated into the swarm and becomes one of their most powerful assets.
After desertion, Raynor and his forces take part in major combat operations across the sector: He fights alongside the Protoss templar Tassadar in the battle that leads to the fall of the Zerg ruler, the Overmind, and splinters the Zerg into several factions. When the expeditionary forces of United Earth Directorate (UED) arrive in the sector to subjugate it, Raynor, Mengsk and Kerrigan (now calling herself the Queen of Blades) combine their Terran, Zerg and Protoss allies to repel the invasion. No sooner than they fall, the alliance shatters.
Four years later, Raynor's rebel movement is contracted by a group called the Moebius Foundation to recover pieces of a Xel'Naga artifact which is ultimately used on Char by a combined force of Raynor's Raiders and Terran Dominion expeditionary fleet to deinfest the Queen of Blades, restoring Sara Kerrigan's humanity. After her deinfestation, Kerrigan is relentlessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk; during one such raid Arcturus's Dominion forces capture and allegedly summarily execute the rebel commander. It is later revealed that Raynor was not in fact executed, but held prisoner as a hostage to keep Kerrigan in line. After being freed from his prison Raynor assists Kerrigan as she storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Arcturus by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode spectacularly. In Legacy of the Void, Raynor and his Raiders are now part of the Dominion military under the new Emperor Valerian, and (with the aid of Artanis and his protoss forces) defend Korhal from an attack by Amon. Joining with Artanis and Kerrigan later on, Raynor watches as Kerrigan ascends to become a Xel'naga and destroys Amon once and for all; two years later, Kerrigan - in human form - visits Raynor at the bar on Mar Sara where he began in Wings of Liberty, and he leaves with her. He is not seen or heard from again.
StarCraft creator Chris Metzen designed Raynor as rough-living and dangerous man; Clotworthy describes Raynor as a man that other characters "wouldn't mess with". Nevertheless, his depiction is meant to be that of an ordinary man. Critics connected sympathetically with Raynor's plights, and GameSpot named him one of the best heroes in video gaming.


==== Matt HornerEdit ====
Matt Horner is the captain of the Raiders' flagship Hyperion and Raynor's second-in-command. Brian Bloom provides Horner's voice. Described as "young and idealistic" and guided by strong moral principles, Horner is originally a supporter of Mengsk, but becomes disgusted by Mengsk's deliberate attacks on civilian Confederate targets. Having come to admire Raynor's bravery and loyalty, Horner follows Raynor when he abandons Mengsk's cause, and is keen to strike at the morally bankrupt Terran Dominion. Horner is only an average combatant in personal combat, but is otherwise an excellent pilot and tactician. First introduced in the novel Queen of Blades, Horner commands the Hyperion as it comes under attack from Zerg in orbit of the planet Char and is forced to withdraw from the system, leaving Raynor and a small group of Raiders stranded on the surface; Horner is only able to return several months later to evacuate the survivors. Horner continues in a similar role in Wings of Liberty, acting as Raynor's conscience and trying to keep his commander focused. After the capture of James Raynor by Arcturus's Dominion forces in Heart of the Swarm, Matt Horner assumes temporary command of Raynor's Raiders, leading the rebel movement for much of the game until Raynor's return to the Hyperion after the raid aboard the prison ship Moros. During the events of Legacy of the Void, Horner is now an admiral commanding the Dominion fleet, joining the joint Dominion/protoss defense against Amon and his Moebius Corps forces. After Amon falls, Horner is the Dominion's chief military leader, as he and Emperor Valerian pledge to maintain peace and prosperity for the Dominion.


==== Rory SwannEdit ====
Rory Swann is the chief engineer of the Hyperion. Swann came from a family of tech-savvy miners who opened a successful private mining operation on Meinhoff: however, their operation was crushed by ever-rising taxes. Swann lodged a complaint to the Kel-Morian Combine officials and discovered that Tavish Kerr, who's mining operations weren't burden with taxes, bribed officials to put rival claims out of business through excessive taxation. Swann started a miner's revolt, claiming independence from the Kel-Morian Combine. However, Combine forces arrived and mercilessly crushed the revolt. Swann himself lost an arm, along with many friends, and was only saved because Raynor's Raiders responded to their distress signal. Swann had nothing left, so he joined the Raiders.


==== Tychus FindlayEdit ====
Tychus J. Findlay is a marine and past associate of Raynor's who becomes affiliated with the Raiders. He appears in the novel Heaven's Devil and in Wings of Liberty, as well in the Starcraft II expansion, Heart of the Swarm. Findlay is known for his charisma and toughness, and by his friendship with James Raynor. He is voiced by Neil Kaplan. Findlay is introduced in the cinematic trailer for StarCraft II, in which he is shown being encased into powered combat armour. According to Blizzard's Nick Carpenter, the marine in the trailer lacked any identity but eventually evolved into Findlay, allowing the cinematic team to flesh out the trailer with the character's personality. Findlay is surrounded by rumours regarding his reputation; on the one hand, he is held as a loyal soldier who risks his life to save his comrades, while on the other, he is regarded as an amoral scoundrel. Findlay and Raynor fought together for the Confederacy several years prior to the events of StarCraft before becoming outlaws; Findlay was eventually captured and incarcerated. By Wings of Liberty, Findlay escapes from prison, tracks down Raynor, and recruits him to work for the secretive Moebius Foundation, where, according to Metzen, Findlay acts as the metaphorical devil on Raynor's shoulder.


==== Gabriel ToshEdit ====
Gabriel Tosh is a mysterious arms dealer and a "spectre"—an elite ghost agent enhanced through the use of terrazine, a potent psionic reagent. Though originally created for Ghost, Tosh is introduced in the novel Spectres and Wings of Liberty, where he is voiced by Dave Fennoy. Metzen describes Tosh as a "Boba Fett-type character" while Andy Chambers feels Tosh is "quasi-Rastafarian". Tosh possesses a nihilistic personality and believes that he must always look out for himself in order to survive. As such, he acts as a foil for the idealistic and honorable character of Matt Horner. Tosh represents an amoral influence on Raynor, and the temptation to cut corners and act like a pirate, although he is not inherently evil.


==== Ariel HansonEdit ====
Dr. Ariel Hanson is a scientist who becomes associated with Raynor's Raiders after her home colony on the planet Agria is invaded by Zerg in Wings of Liberty, where she is voiced by Ali Hillis. A selfless and altruistic individual, she mainly wishes for life to return to normal. She is considered to be the moral opposite of Tychus Findlay, acting as a metaphorical angel on Raynor's shoulder, and represents a positive moral influence on Raynor. Originally designed as a male character, Hanson was changed in development to female to act as a love interest for Raynor, albeit limited by Raynor's status as a mercenary and fugitive, and moreover the fact that Raynor is still trying to sort himself out in relation to Sarah Kerrigan.


=== Terran DominionEdit ===


==== Arcturus MengskEdit ====
Arcturus Mengsk was the emperor of the Terran Dominion, which presided over the majority of the Terrans in the Koprulu Sector. The main antagonist of the series, he is voiced by James Harper and is the primary subject of the novel I, Mengsk. Mengsk is extremely intelligent and is capable as both a strategist and tactician. While Mengsk does not empathize with people well, he is highly skilled at oratory and propaganda and possesses a remarkable ability for manipulating other people.
Born on Korhal IV, the scion of a powerful founding family of the Terran Confederacy, Mengsk was a colonel in the Confederate Marine Corps and a veteran of the Guild Wars, who became a successful prospector after war's end. Though trying to distance himself from the actions of his father, a prominent Korhal senator and vocal dissident against the Confederacy, Mengsk became a revolutionary himself when his father, mother, and younger sister were murdered by Confederate assassins. His activities soon spurred the Confederacy to launch a nuclear attack against Korhal, wiping out its population; Mengsk swore vengeance, and formed a revolutionary group he called the Sons of Korhal. Years of open conflict successfully weakened Confederate control over the fringe worlds, during which he recruited followers such as Sarah Kerrigan, Jim Raynor and Edmund Duke. Raynor and Kerrigan grew uneasy with Mengsk's increasingly extreme methods, namely luring Zerg to attack Confederate targets, leading to Mengsk abandoning Kerrigan to the Zerg on the Confederate capital of Tarsonis (another reason for the latter was Kerrigan had been the assassin that murdered his father). With the destruction of Tarsonis by the Zerg, Mengsk crowned himself emperor and styled himself as a benevolent dictator.
In Brood War, the Dominion is invaded by the United Earth Directorate and Mengsk narrowly escapes capture with the reluctant help of Raynor. Faced with execution and the destruction of the Dominion as alternatives, Mengsk allies with Kerrigan and Raynor to defeat the UED, but Kerrigan eventually betrays their alliance and delivers a crippling blow to Mengsk's forces. Nevertheless, Mengsk rebuilds and the Dominion remains the dominant Terran power. In Frontline, many of the stories in the anthology paint Mengsk and the Dominion overall as tyrannical and corrupt, no different from the Confederacy.
In Wings of Liberty, Mengsk and his son Valerian find the Dominion opposed by several rebel and paramilitary groups, including those loyal to Raynor. Arcturus suffers compound setbacks during the game, initially due to the mass invasion of Dominion space by Zerg forces which catches the Dominion military and Mengsk unprepared, and later from Raynor's Raiders who capture and broadcast proof of Mengsk's war crimes during the events of StarCraft. Despite these setbacks Arcturus manages to overcome these hardships, maintaining his position as Emperor of the Dominion for the remainder of the game. During the events of Heart of the Swarm, Kerrigan successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal with help from Raynor's Raiders. After a showdown with Acturus Mengsk inside his Palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Acturus by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode spectacularly. In the wake of his death, Valerian ascends to the throne vacated by Arcturus.
GameSpy cites Mengsk as a classic example of The Who's "Won't Get Fooled Again" lyrics "meet the new boss, same as the old boss". Mengsk was responsible for the release from prison of Tychus Findlay, with the specific purpose of tailing Jim Raynor and killing Kerrigan; Raynor foils this plan by killing Tychus.


==== Edmund DukeEdit ====
Edmund Duke is ranking officer in first the Confederacy and later the Dominion. Voiced in the games by Jack Ritschel, Duke also appears in several novels, including Liberty's Crusade, Shadow of the Xel'Naga and Queen of Blades. A scion of one of the influential Old Families of Confederacy with a long career in the military, Duke is a methodical and experienced tactician but also as an egotistical and xenophobic man. As a colonel, Duke commands the Alpha Squadron of the Confederate Security Forces, and is the face of the Confederacy for the player in the early parts of StarCraft. Duke initially leads the defense of Confederate colonies Chau Sara and Mar Sara from the Zerg and the Protoss fleet commanded by Tassadar, for which he is promoted to general.
Duke is later charged with quelling rebellion on the Confederate world of Antiga Prime, but is defeated by Mengsk's forces. When Duke's flagship Norad II is shot down by the Zerg during the battle, Duke is rescued by Raynor on Mengsk's orders in return for the defection of the general and his squadron, and Duke's knowledge is vital to Mengsk's assault on Tarsonis. Mengsk, still skeptical of Duke's loyalty, later dispatches Duke on expeditions to investigate the Zerg on Char and a Xel'Naga artifact on Bhekar Ro in Shadow of the Xel'Naga, engagements which decimate Alpha Squadron. In Brood War, Duke organises the Dominion's fleet defences against the United Earth Directorate, and later follows Mengsk into alliance with Kerrigan and her Zerg. However, as part of a surgical strike against the Dominion's military capabilities, Kerrigan has Duke's flagship destroyed, killing the general.


==== Valerian MengskEdit ====
Valerian Mengsk is the son of Arcturus Mengsk and his successor as Emperor of the Terran Dominion. Valerian is first introduced in The Dark Templar Saga series of novels, while his backstory is further developed in I, Mengsk. Valerian was created as Metzen felt that Arcturus' story had been effectively told in StarCraft and Brood War. While Blizzard stipulated Valerian's physical description, The Dark Templar Saga author Christie Golden was given the freedom to develop the character as she wished. A disciple of Japanese martial arts and a keen archaeologist, he is described as "brilliant... and probably a bit arrogant for knowing it". Valerian is particularly interested in Xel'Naga artifacts, which he employs mercenaries and leading archaeologists to retrieve and study. Valerian was raised in secrecy on a number of worlds across the Koprulu Sector during his father's campaign against the Confederacy. While Valerian shares Arcturus' passion for liquors and ancient weapons, his relationship with his father is adversarial due to Arcturus' disdain for both him and his mother in his childhood.
Valerian made his game debut in Wings of Liberty, voiced by Josh Keaton. He is confronted by Jim Raynor, mistaking him for his father Arcturus, aboard the Dominion battlecruiser Bucephalus. Valerian reveals that he is the owner of the Moebius Foundation, the think tank that Raynor had been collecting the pieces of a Xel'Naga artifact for, and claimed that his mission was the same as Raynor's - to rescue Kerrigan. Taking more than half the Dominion fleet, Valerian joins forces with Raynor's Raiders and lays siege to the Zerg stronghold of Char, as part of an effort to prove to the Dominion (and to his father) that he will be worthy to take the emperor's crown after Arcturus. Ultimately, the mission succeeds in de-infesting Kerrigan, but in the aftermath of the battle a disagreement between Arcturus and Valerian over Sara Kerrigan's fate sparks an armed civil war between the Emperor and Prince, leading Valerian and a faction of the Dominion's armed forces loyal to him to seek shelter with Raynor's Raiders.
In Heart of the Swarm, Valerian helps Raynor and his Raiders escape into the Umojan Protectorate, where Kerrigan undergoes extensive testing in a research lab. The lab is discovered and attacked by a Dominion task force, and Valerian and Kerrigan escape on board the Hyperion, the Raiders' flagship. Valerian is nearly psionically strangled by Kerrigan for leaving Raynor behind on the base. Valerian knew that his father would be willing to sacrifice him to destroy Kerrigan, even in spite of Hyperion captain Matt Horner warning the Dominion fleet that he was on board, and so he aided Kerrigan and the Raiders in searching for him. During the final assault against Korhal, Valerian recognized that Arcturus was beyond redemption, and asked only that Kerrigan minimize civilian casualties; Kerrigan thus elected to attend his request, recognizing him as a different man from his father. Kerrigan killed Arcturus shortly thereafter. Following the death of his father and the departure of the Zerg, Valerian assumed the throne and became the new Emperor of the Dominion. He immediately went to work rebuilding the Dominion, and enacted new laws to eliminate the corruption and abuse of power that had occurred during his father's reign. These reforms included abolishing forced military conscription and slave labor. He also reorganized a number of his father's secret projects, such as Project Blackstone.


==== NovaEdit ====
November Annabella Terra, also known by the call sign "Nova", is a ghost agent and the protagonist of the StarCraft: Ghost sub-series. Grey DeLisle provides the voice for Nova. Despite the indefinite postponement of the Ghost video game, she appears in Wings of Liberty and Heart of the Swarm as well as a series of novels, including StarCraft Ghost: Nova and StarCraft Ghost: Spectres. Nova is the daughter of one of the highly influential Confederate Old Families; despite having unusually high psionic potential her father prevents her from being taken into the Confederate Ghost Program. However, after her family is murdered by an anti-Confederate resistance movement, Nova flees to the undercity of Tarsonis, where she is forced to work as an organized crime enforcer. Nova is rescued during the Zerg invasion of Tarsonis, and ends up in the possession of the newly formed Terran Dominion, who train her as a ghost. She is featured as a playable hero in Heroes of the Storm. Blizzard announced that Nova will also be the subject of her own RTS follow on titled Nova Covert Ops, which is scheduled for release sometime in 2016.


==== Horace WarfieldEdit ====
General Horace Warfield is put in command of the Dominion forces to fight the second Zerg invasion, in Wings of Liberty. He served in the Confederate military under Arcturus Mengsk, and held a higher place among Mengsk's advisors than Edmund Duke, who also abandoned the confederacy. His entire family was killed during the Zerg assault on Tarsonis due to the use of the psi-emitters, about which Warfield is rumoured to have provided extremely valuable intelligence. In Heart of the Swarm, Warfield is defeated by Kerrigan and tells her to let the transports full of wounded troops leave the planet alive, calling her a traitor to humanity and stating that Raynor would be ashamed of her. Kerrigan, furious at the general's comments, executes him but allows the transports to escape.


=== United Earth DirectorateEdit ===


==== Gerard DuGalleEdit ====
Gerard DuGalle is the commanding admiral of the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force to the Koprulu Sector. DuGalle only appears in Brood War and is voiced by Jack Ritschel. Considered the UED's most capable military leader, DuGalle, a Frenchman, is a staunch believer in the UED's mission to pacify the sector and carries out his orders with precision. In Brood War, DuGalle leads the UED as it conquers the Terran Dominion; however, despite his experience, DuGalle believes misinformation planted by former Confederate soldier Samir Duran regarding a psi disruptor, a device that disrupts Zerg communications, on Tarsonis. When DuGalle's lifelong friend Alexei Stukov abandons the fleet, DuGalle allows Duran to assassinate Stukov as a traitor, only realizing his mistake too late. Nevertheless, DuGalle acts to prevent Duran destroying the psi disruptor and uses it to capture the Zerg Overmind on Char. However, as a result of demoralization, limited manpower and an alliance of enemies led by Kerrigan, the fleet is eventually pushed back and when a final attempt to recapture Char fails, DuGalle orders the retreat. Shortly before the UED fleet is overtaken by Zerg and destroyed, DuGalle composes a letter to his wife in which he admits responsibility for his closest friend's death and commits suicide by a gunshot to the head.


==== Alexei StukovEdit ====
Alexei Stukov is the vice admiral and second-in-command of the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force. Voiced by Cástulo Guerra, he appears in Brood War and three bonus levels. A man of Russian descent, his military career primarily revolves around secret research, though he is also noted as an excellent tactician. A close friend of DuGalle, Stukov will debate situations with the admiral but will subordinate himself to his friend's higher rank. Stukov becomes suspicious of the motives of Samir Duran after the latter convinces DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor. Believing the device to be the UED's best hope to conquer the Zerg, Stukov instead takes the psi disruptor to Braxis but is tracked down and shot dead by Duran. With his dying breaths, Stukov convinces DuGalle that Duran is a traitor and to keep the psi disruptor running for the UED's assault on the Zerg homeworld of Char. Stukov's body is given a full funeral and UED propaganda portrays Stukov as a hero, claiming he died in combat on Char.
Stukov is later mysteriously revived by a Zerg cerebrate to make use of him for its own deeds. He is first observed, apparently infested, by pirates raiding a secret science facility in the bonus mission "Deception", a facility that Stukov subsequently destroys. Stukov later appears in another bonus map, "Mercenaries II", in which he hires several mercenary groups to destroy some of his adversaries. In the StarCraft 64 secret mission "Resurrection", Artanis sends a task force headed by Raynor to inject Stukov with an experimental serum; the serum reverses the infestation effects and leaves Stukov healthy, albeit embittered. However, the Protoss cure would prove only temporary, and once Stukov was turned over to the Moebious Foundation for research purposes, the scientists re-infested him in an attempt to replicate the cure, without success. Creative director Andy Chambers regards the resurrection as an experiment by the Zerg, while Metzen notes that Stukov's resurrection had "really interesting hooks". Although Blizzard's former producer Bill Roper hopes that Stukov's storyline will be developed further, the character will only be reintroduced if Blizzard can "figure out the right way to do it".
Infested Stukov makes an appearance in StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm, voiced by Victor Brandt. According to him, he escaped his Moebius captors after being re-infested and learns that the foundation is secretly breeding Protoss-Zerg hybrids at the request of Arcturus Mengsk. Although not a hybrid himself, Stukov oddly seems to possess an amalgamation of Protoss and Zerg abilities and characteristics, though this likely resulted from his exposure to the Protoss anti-infestation cure. Once the lab breeding the hybrid is destroyed, he realizes that he has no purpose and cannot return to Earth or any Terran faction as an infested human. Kerrigan offers him a position in the Swarm as a brood leader until he makes up his mind, and Stukov ultimately decides to stay with the Swarm until the end.
Stukov returns in StarCraft II: Legacy of the Void during the invasion of the Void. During the invasion, Stukov helps kill the Shapeshifter, reversing the position of how Stukov met his demise during Brood War.


== Protoss charactersEdit ==


=== KhalaiEdit ===
The Khala, or "Path of Ascension", was the religious law of the protoss, established after an era known as the "Aeon of Strife" that followed the departure of the Xel'Naga. There are four distinct castes: The Khalai, made up of workers, scientists and craftsmen; the Templar, the military; the Preservers, whose purpose is to remember deceased Protoss' minds and maintain the telepathic network that unified the warring ancient Protoss into the Khalai; and the Judicators, which form the Conclave that ruled over protoss society.


==== TassadarEdit ====
Tassadar is a high templar who holds the rank of executor in the Khalai military. He appears in StarCraft and in several novels, most notably Queen of Blades. Tassadar is voiced by Michael Gough in StarCraft, with Michael Dorn playing the part in later appearances. Described as being fascinated with, if somewhat wary of, the dark templar, Tassadar is the commander of the fleet that made first contact with the Terrans by destroying their colony of Chau Sara to contain Zerg infestation. However, Tassadar eventually disregards his orders to continue destroying worlds with no concern for the Terrans, and instead engages the Zerg by conventional means. After tracking the Zerg to their homeworld of Char, he encounters the dark templar Zeratul and Jim Raynor, forging a friendship with the two and learning how to use his psionic powers in conjunction with the powers of the dark templar.
The Khalai government sees Tassadar's consortion with the dark templar as heretical and as a bigger threat to their society than the Zerg invasion of the Protoss homeworld Aiur, sending Aldaris and Artanis to arrest him. Artanis however, along with Fenix, sides with Tassadar, sparking a civil war between Tassadar's followers and the government. The conflict is only ended when Tassadar demonstrates the effectiveness of the dark templar against the Zerg. With Raynor, Zeratul and Fenix, Tassadar breaks through the Zerg defences on Aiur to the Zerg Overmind; Tassadar channels both his own psionic energies and those of the dark templar through the hull of his flagship and crashes it into the Overmind. The resulting discharge of energy destroys the Overmind and transcends Tassadar to a new level of spiritual existence; Metzen refers to this transformation as becoming a "twilight messiah".
By the events of StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty, Tassadar is believed dead by the Protoss, though he has become a legendary figure among them. However, when Zeratul visits the remains of the Overmind in his investigations into the Koprulu Sector's future, Tassadar appears in spirit form and shows him a vision that the Overmind had originally shown him when he destroyed it. This vision foretold the fall of the galaxy to the Zerg Swarm led by the Xel'naga Amon and his Protoss-Zerg hybrids.


==== FenixEdit ====
Fenix is a praetor within the military of the Khalai. Bill Roper voices Fenix in both StarCraft and Brood War. A templar and an old friend of Tassadar's, Fenix is a powerful and cunning leader, but remains distrustful towards the motives of the ruling judicator caste. Under the command of Aldaris, Fenix helps defend Aiur from the Zerg invasion, but eventually falls in battle when his position is overwhelmed by Zerg. Due to a malfunctioning of his psi-blades, Fenix falls to a small army of hydralisk at the battle against the Zerg in Antioch. Nevertheless, Fenix is retrieved and integrated into a dragoon, a mechanical fire support unit designed to allow incapacitated warriors to continue military service. Fenix allies his templar forces with Tassadar's upon the schism between Tassadar and the Protoss government, later leading a task force against the Overmind's outer defenses, facilitating Zeratul's assassination of a number of cerebrates and ultimately the death of the Overmind itself. Over this time, Fenix develops a strong friendship with Tassadar's Terran companion Jim Raynor.
In Brood War, Fenix and Raynor remain behind as a rear guard when the Protoss evacuate the now Zerg-overrun Aiur through a warp gate. They hold it until attacked by United Earth Directorate forces pursuing Arcturus Mengsk, upon which they escape through the gate, disabling it as they depart. With Raynor and Mengsk, Fenix enters into an alliance with Sarah Kerrigan against the UED, even leading the Zerg forces on a raiding mission for resources on Moria. However, after the UED is routed from their position on the Dominion capital world of Korhal, Kerrigan turns on her allies. Though unfazed by Kerrigan's betrayal, Fenix is slain when Kerrigan's Zerg launch a surprise attack against his base camp on Korhal. In StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm, Raynor shows that he still harbors a grudge against Kerrigan for Fenix's death after seeing her willingly become infested again after all his hard work in returning her to human form.


==== ArtanisEdit ====
Artanis is a high templar and a military commander introduced in Brood War, where he is voiced by Paul Ainsley; the character is voiced by Patrick Seitz in StarCraft II. The character also appears in the novels Queen of Blades and Twilight. Later retcons have made Artanis the identity of the player character for the Protoss campaign in StarCraft. An ambitious leader, Artanis is the youngest templar to achieve the rank of praetor and executor. Artanis holds Tassadar in high esteem and despite being a strong believer in Khalai system, he also holds to the idea of reunification with the dark templar. Artanis is responsible for the initial defense of Aiur alongside Fenix before being dispatched to arrest Tassadar by Aldaris; Artanis, however, sides with Tassadar and helps him defeat the Overmind. Artanis later organizes the evacuation of his now devastated home world to the dark templar planet of Shakuras, and with Zeratul undertakes measures to cleanse the Zerg presence on Shakuras through the use of a Xel'Naga temple. When Sarah Kerrigan's actions result in the deaths of Aldaris, Fenix and Raszagal, Artanis commands a fleet to bring Kerrigan to justice on Char, and despite allying with both the Dominion and the remainder of the UED, his forces are defeated by her Zerg. Artanis returns to Shakuras to rebuild the Protoss civilization; with Zeratul having disappeared, Artanis becomes the hierarch of the unified Protoss Protectorate, but struggles with reintegrating the two estranged branches of his people, with many of the Aiur survivors desiring to retake their home world. He makes a brief appearance in Wings of Liberty in the vision of the Protoss's last stand against the hybrids and their Zerg swarm.
Artanis is the central character of Legacy of the Void, the third and final part of StarCraft II. He leads the Protoss to invade Aiur but as the invasion went on, many Protoss fell under Amon's control. Amon has seized the Khala and is controlling the Protoss via their nerve cords. Artanis initially fell under their control but Zeratul severed his nerve cord, dying in the process. Shortly afterwards, Artanis leaves Aiur behind in the ship Spear of Adun and begins his quest to destroy Amon.


==== SelendisEdit ====
Selendis is the executor of the Protoss military following the reunification of the race. The character is introduced in the novel Twilight and in the Wings of Liberty campaign, where she is played by Cree Summer. Selendis is fiercely loyal to her race's ideals and completely dedicated to her responsibilities. A protégée of Artanis, she considers the dark templar to be a threat to her heritage but is willing to work beside them. Selendis is particularly eager to reclaim Aiur from the Zerg. Shortly after Artanis cleanses Shakuras of Zerg, Selendis takes part in an expedition to rescue three stranded heroes from Aiur; however, the mission was sabotaged by Ulrezaj, who kills two of the trapped warriors. During this time, Selendis became aware of other Protoss survivors stranded on Aiur, but as it was not believed possible to save them, their existence is kept secret. Later, Selendis commands the defenses of the dark templar archives on Ehlna against attack by Zerg and Ulrezaj, resulting in Ulrezaj's defeat.
In Wings of Liberty Selendis leads a force to the planet Haven, where refugees of Meinhoff and Agria have settled after the fall of their old homeworlds, to purge it with fire in order to eradicate a zerg virus which has infested several refugees. Raynor's Raiders appear and are formally greeted by Selendis as past allies, Selendis explains her actions and intentions which leaves the player with one out of two options.
Either the player purges Haven in the Protoss' place while trying to save as many uninfested refugees as possible, this option will have Selendis praise Raynor and calling him a "true friend of the Protoss", but she will not appear afterwards.
In the other option Raynor sides with Ariel Hanson of Agria, who is the unofficial leader of the refugees, and her ideals of being able to create a cure for the Zerg Infestation. Selendis will lead her forces and attempt to burn the settlements with a Mothership while Raynor will attempt to destroy said ship and Protoss outposts which reinforces the Mothership's shields. When successful Selendis and her remaining forces will retreat and comment on Raynor's leading abilities as well as hope that his trust in the refugees is not unfounded.
In the last mission of the Protoss mini-campaign Selendis appears as one of the heroes which makes their last stand against the Zerg and Hybrids and eventually perishes, her last words are an apology to Tassadar for not being strong enough. Her unit is a Carrier.


==== AldarisEdit ====
Aldaris is a member of the ruling judicator caste of Protoss society; in StarCraft he acts as liaison between the player character and the Protoss government. He is voiced by Paul Eiding in both StarCraft and Brood War. Aldaris is a fanatical believer in the Khala and does not hesitate to judge others through a strict interpretation of its tenets. As a result, he is outraged by Tassadar's association with the dark templar, and following the outbreak of war between the judicator caste and the templar caste, commands the government forces against Tassadar. Aldaris captures Tassadar and puts him on trial for crimes of blasphemy and treason, though Tassadar is freed by Zeratul. Aldaris later witnesses the rebels successfully penetrate the Zerg's core defenses, and wishes them luck in their final battle against the Overmind. In Brood War, Aldaris reluctantly allies with the dark templar when the Protoss flee Aiur for Shakuras. However, when Sarah Kerrigan is accepted as an ally by dark templar matriarch Raszagal, Aldaris is furious. While Artanis and Zeratul are absent, he discovers Raszagal is being mentally controlled by Kerrigan and instigates a rebellion amongst the Khalai refugees. When his insurrection is thwarted, the judicator tries to explain his actions to Artanis and Zeratul, but is murdered by Kerrigan before he can reveal her involvement.


==== TaldarinEdit ====
Ancient Protoss, a protoss dragoon, holding the rank of praetor. He was introduced in the StarCraft 64 map, Resurrection IV. Along with Jim Raynor took part in the mission on Braxis to de-infest Alexei Stukov. To date, it is his only appearance but it is believed he may return in the upcoming expansion StarCraft II: Legacy of the Void.


=== NerazimEdit ===
The Nerazim, or Dark Templar, were exiled from Aiur for refusing to submit to the communal will of the Khala. They are warriors who strike from the shadows, and remain dedicated defenders of their people despite their banishment. After the devastation of Aiur in StarCraft, the Nerazim took in their Khalai brethren on their shadowy homeworld of Shakuras, where both sides work to rebuild Protoss society.


==== ZeratulEdit ====
Zeratul is a Nerazim prelate and one of the main Protoss protagonists. The character is voiced by Jack Ritschel in StarCraft and Brood War, and by Fred Tatasciore in all three parts of StarCraft II. A renowned psionic warrior and assassin, Zeratul is somewhat secretive and calculating, but is nevertheless honorable and loyal to his species. He teaches Tassadar how to use dark templar energies and facilitates the final attack on the Overmind by slaying several cerebrates. Following the death of the Overmind, Zeratul tries to put in motion the reunification of the Khalai survivors with the wayward dark templar and unmask the secrets of Samir Duran's experiments. After Duran revealed he had been breeding Protoss-Zerg hybrids for a greater master, Zeratul set out to find Duran's master and his plan, which encompasses all of his activities in the three installments of StarCraft II. In Wings of Liberty, he gives Jim Raynor a crystal with his memories to emphasize the importance of the latter's mission to de-infest Kerrigan. In Heart of the Swarm, he guides Kerrigan to Zerus, the original home of the Zerg, and encourages her to re-infest herself so she can stop Amon, a fallen Xel'naga who is revealed to be the master of Duran and seeks to destroy all life in the Korpulu Sector and remold it in his image. Zeratul will also feature in the events of Legacy of the Void (originally believed to be the central character, the actual protagonist of the story is Artanis). He appears early on but is killed as he severs Artanis's nerve cords to cut him off from Amon's control. He is described by GameSpot as a "dark warrior who champions the light" and a "willing scapegoat" for his people and ranked in their top ten heroes chart.
The character of Zeratul was created by Blizzard Entertainment's Chris Metzen, with concept art produced by other Blizzard artists such as Samwise Didier. Chris Metzen mentioned that Ritschel died some time during the development of the game, and thus Fred Tatasciore has taken over as the new voice actor. Tatasciore described Zeratul as an incredible character, a "Darth Vader" who invests so much in the survival of things, and one of the best characters he has ever played. GameSpot described all the characters in StarCraft as "three-dimensional, full of personality and complexity", and then continued to comment: "Yet even among this star-studded cast, it is Zeratul who stands out as the most noble of heroes, although he is shrouded in a cloak of mystery and aloofness".


==== VorazunEdit ====
Vorazun is a Nerazim matriarch, daughter to Raszagal, and the leader of the remaining Nerazim on Shakuras. She is a skilled warrior, and dedicated to her people.


==== RaszagalEdit ====
Raszagal was the matriarch of the Nerazim on Shakuras, and mother to Vorazun. The character appears in Brood War, where she is voiced by Debra DeLiso, and in the novel Shadow Hunters. Described as one of the oldest living Protoss and imbued with tremendous psychic powers, she is one of the few to clearly remember the Protoss homeworld from before the exile of the Nerazim. During her youth, Raszagal was important in ensuring the dark templar were only exiled, rather than exterminated. In Brood War, Raszagal directs Zeratul and Artanis to cleanse the Zerg from Shakuras and welcomes Sarah Kerrigan as an ally in their mission. This spurs Aldaris to rebellion; Raszagal consequently orders his death. Kerrigan and Samir Duran later kidnap Raszagal from Shakuras, using her to blackmail Zeratul into killing the second Overmind. It quickly becomes apparent that Kerrigan has mentally subverted Raszagal and has been using her to manipulate events from the beginning. Zeratul captures Raszagal, but is unable to hold off the Zerg forces long enough to escape. Realizing that the matriarch is beyond redemption from Kerrigan's influence, Zeratul kills Raszagal. Raszagal's mind is freed by the lethal blow, and she dies thanking Zeratul for releasing her, naming him as her successor as leader of the dark templar.


==== MohandarEdit ====
Mohandar is a prelate within the Nerazim, the elderly leader of the Nerazim and member of the Hierarchy. He believes that Zeratul should return to Shakuras.
In 2503,[3] Mohandar attended a meeting of the Hierarchy to discuss Zamara, a missing preserver. There were none on Shakuras. A terran female, Rosemary Dahl, attended the meeting, along with Vartanil (a survivor from Aiur) and Executor Selendis; she was subject to protoss anti-female bias (due to their experiences with Sarah Kerrigan). Among the topics of conversation covered were Ulrezaj, a powerful dark archon and old enemy of the Khalai. During the meeting, Mohandar deferred to the judgment of Hierarch Artanis. Artanis decided to launch an expedition to rescue the preserver, but didn't know where to start. Mohandar, however, believed he knew where Zamara was going — Ehlna, a Nerazim sanctuary moon. There, the Nerazim, who had no preservers, used modified khaydarin crystals to store memories.
Mohandar tried to insist on only sending Nerazim to the sanctuary, but Selendis talked him into allowing a small number of templar warriors to accompany the expedition. He agreed, but only if there was no disrespect. Vartanil went along with them, and (much to Mohandar's annoyance) so did Dahl. Mohandar pointed out the protoss were still evaluating her, a terran female.
He took part in the mission to Ehlna. Once at the Alys'aril (the center where Nerazim memories were preserved) he met Jake Ramsey (the terran carrying Zamara's essence) and Zeratul. The latter made ready to leave. Mohandar told him his place was on Shakuras within the Hierarchy. Zeratul promised to return to Shakuras soon.
Mohandar appears once in Zeratul's apocalyptic vision at the end of the Protoss mini-campaign in Wings of Liberty. By this time, it is implied that he is the most senior member of the Dark Templar remaining aside from Zeratul. He is set to be a character in Legacy of the Void.


==== UlrezajEdit ====
Ulrezaj is a Nerazim rebel who believes that the Khalai Protoss should either be removed from Shakuras or exterminated. He is introduced in the downloadable Brood War campaign "Enslavers: Dark Vengeance", and later appears as the antagonist of the novels Shadow Hunters and Twilight. Brought up as a scholar on the moon of Ehlna, Ulrezaj begins to abuse his position by learning from prohibited sources of information. Resenting the exile of the dark templar from Aiur, he abandons his career and takes up arms against the Khalai Protoss as they establish themselves on Shakuras. He later uses the knowledge learned from his early days to become a dark archon; an immensely powerful psionic being created by several Protoss merging. Allying with a Terran smuggler, Alan Schezar, Ulrezaj moves an orbital base over Shakuras; Ulrezaj uses Schezar's resources to mutate Zerg to attack the Khalai Protoss, while an EMP device disables Shakuras' power grid. Though defeated by Zeratul's forces, Ulrezaj escapes.
Ulrezaj reappears several years later, residing on Aiur where he is manipulating a faction of Protoss survivors who were not evacuated. Ulrezaj uses these Protoss to attempt to capture a Terran archaeologist, Jacob Ramsey, who has the powerful mind of a Protoss archivist, Zamara, residing in his own mind; their failure to do so leads to Ulrezaj personally trying to take Ramsey, but the archaeologist escapes through a warp gate while both Zerg and Valerian Mengsk's forces also attempt to capture him. Ulrezaj traces Ramsey to Ehlna, breaking through the defenses of both the Protoss and the Dominion. However, Zamara uses her last energy to lock Ulrezaj's mind into a storage crystal, sacrificing herself to keep Ulrezaj trapped.


=== Tal'DarimEdit ===
The Tal'Darim, or "The Forged Ones" are a fanatical sect of Protoss cut off from the Khala via the drug Sundrop. They are one of the antagonists in every game, and serve Amon, to rebuild the universe in his name.


==== NyonEdit ====
Nyon is a Tal'Darim executor who Raynor's Raiders fight in Wings of Liberty for pieces of Xel'Naga artifacts. He is killed later in the game, when the Raiders destroy his mothership.


==== AlarakEdit ====
Alarak (voiced by John de Lancie) is a central figure of the Tal'Darim in the service of Amon. He was first described in the short story "Ascension", one of the lead-up short stories before the release of Legacy of the Void. In the story, he holds the title of Fourth Ascendant, a minor leader in the Tal'Darim hierarchy, known as the "Chain of Ascension"; one can only advance in rank through Rak'Shir, a ritual trial by combat of their immediate superior. When the First Ascendant, Nuroka, challenges Highlord Ma'lash for leadership of the Tal'Darim, Alarak remains neutral, until Ma'lash seemed on the brink of defeat; he then declared for him, offering his psionic strength, allowing Ma'lash to defeat Nuroka. With the First, Second, and Third Ascendants claimed in the battle, Alarak is named First Ascendant; however, Ma'lash is wary, and threatens a slow and painful death if Alarak betrays him.
Throughout the ritual, Alarak is filled with doubts as to Amon's goals, which becomes a betrayal as Amon begins to phase out the Tal'Darim and other "mortal" forces, relying more and more on his hybrid. Alarak thus forms an alliance with Artanis, who pledges to aid in bringing down Ma'lash and removing the Tal'Darim from Amon's service. With the aid of Artanis' forces, Alarak challenges Ma'lash to Rak'Shir and defeats him, becoming the new Highlord of the Tal'Darim. Declaring that Amon had lied to them, Alarak promises revenge against Amon, and his forces join with Artanis and the forces he has assembled as they make their final push on Aiur to defeat Amon. After Amon is destroyed for good later on, Alarak decides to find a new homeworld for the Tal'Darim rather than join the remaining protoss on Aiur, though he allows any of his people who wish it one chance to remain with Artanis.


== Zerg charactersEdit ==


=== Overmind's Zerg SwarmEdit ===


==== The OvermindEdit ====
The Overmind is the center of the Zerg Swarm's hive mind society, created by the Xel'Naga as a single consciousness for their experiments on the Zerg. It is the antagonist of StarCraft, where it is voiced by Jack Ritschel; Paul Eiding voices the character in Wings of Liberty. At some point during its creation, it was secretly enslaved by the Dark Voice (a fallen xel'naga referred to as Amon), who implanted it with a directive to destroy the Protoss and bound the Zerg to a hive mind. The Overmind becomes aware of Xel'Naga, attacking and assimilating its masters. Through this, the Overmind learns of the existence of the Protoss and is determined to assimilate the fellow Xel'Naga-empowered species, believing this will result in perfection. To provide the necessary force to overcome the Protoss, the Overmind targets the psionic potential of the Terrans for assimilation. He also assimilated Sarah Kerrigan so as to create a weapon to free the Zerg from the control of his Dark Master. The Zerg and Protoss clash on various Terran worlds, eventually leading to Zeratul assassinating the cerebrate Zasz. Zasz's death momentarily links the minds of the Overmind and Zeratul, allowing Overmind to learn the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur. The Overmind quickly launches an invasion of Aiur and manifests itself on the planet's surface. Following a lengthy and costly campaign on Aiur, Tassadar harnesses the energies of the dark templar to strike at the Overmind directly, disintegrating it.
A second Overmind is created in Brood War, formed from the merging of several cerebrates. This second Overmind never reaches full maturity, and thus lacks the power and intelligence of the original and is much weaker; attacks that were superficial to the first Overmind send the second into remission, although dark templar energies are still needed to kill it. The second Overmind is captured and drugged by the United Earth Directorate, who use its control of the Swarm to bolster its own forces in the Koprulu Sector, but it is ultimately slain by Zeratul.
Although no longer a major character in the story, the remains of the original Overmind appear again in StarCraft II. Following the interpretation of the prophetic fragments recovered by Zeratul on Ulaan by the Preservers of Zhakul, Zeratul deduces that the "Great Hungerer" referenced by the prophecy refers to the Zerg Overmind, and travels to Aiur to recover whatever memories lingered within the remains of the Overmind's husk. In the course of his investigation Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar, who passes on vital information he obtained from the Overmind concerning the Queen of Blades, the Hybrid, and the Overmind's vision of one possible future brought about due to the death of Kerrigan. Alongside Kerrigan, the Overmind was rated the eighth most diabolical video game villain by GamePro.


==== CerebratesEdit ====
Cerebrates are secondary agents in the Zerg Swarm, each of which commands an individual brood of Zerg that possesses a distinct tactical role within the hierarchy. Alongside the Overmind, the cerebrates are the only Zerg with full sapience, each with its own personality and methods, although they are genetically incapable of disobeying the Overmind. Cerebrates can be reincarnated by the Overmind upon death, though dark templar energies are capable of preventing this. The death of a cerebrate causes the Overmind to lose control of its respective brood, which will then run amok. The highest ranking cerebrate is Daggoth, commander of the Tiamat Brood, the largest and most powerful brood in the Zerg Swarm. Voiced by Micky Neilson, Daggoth is the most strong-willed and ferocious of the cerebrates. It trains the player character in the Zerg campaign of StarCraft and dispenses forces to protect Kerrigan following her transformation. Daggoth is also charged with protecting the Overmind itself. In the wake of the Overmind's death, Daggoth takes command of one faction of Zerg, ordering several cerebrates to merge to form a new Overmind.
The second most prominent cerebrate is Zasz, who commands the first strike Garm Brood. A clever but somewhat questioning leader, Zasz is voiced by Bill Roper in StarCraft. Kerrigan often argues with Zasz over her impulsive and seemingly rebellious actions; despite the Overmind's assurance that Kerrigan is loyal, Zasz remains untrusting. However, while Tassadar distracts the attention of Kerrigan's forces, Zasz is assassinated by Zeratul. Its death gives the Overmind and Zeratul a temporary mental link, allowing the Overmind to find Aiur and Zeratul to learn the origins of the Zerg. Zasz's final words to Kerrigan proclaim her to be "the doom of us all"; following Kerrigan's rise to power at the culmination of Brood War, Zasz is seemingly proven correct. Ironically, Zeratul's connection with the Overmind following Zasz's death reveals Kerrigan to be the only hope of resisting the eradication of all life by the Xel'naga Amon.
Insurrection features two further cerebrates, Nargil and Auza. Commander of the Fenris Brood and with the directive of search and destroy, Nargil itself is capable of intercepting enemy transmissions and provides tactical support for the player in Insurrection‍ '​s Zerg campaign. Auza, who commands the Incubus Brood and is responsible for reconnaissance, attempts to personally assimilate a rebel Terran psychic, but is overwhelmed as the psychic's mind overcomes its own. As a result, the Overmind is forced to kill Auza. Retribution introduces Zargil of the Sennith Brood, who relays the Overmind's directives to the player. Various other cerebrates are also featured throughout the series, though following the death of the second Overmind, Metzen explained that all remaining extant cerebrates died, as they were not designed to live without their creator.


=== Zagara BroodEdit ===
Following the eradication of the last cerebrates in Brood War, Kerrigan creates powerful and intelligent broodmothers to fulfill their role in the Swarm. Kerrigan commanded the broodmothers "to fight, to conquer, to be strong and to lead by force of will". Through decentralizing, Kerrigan ensured the Zerg Swarm could function without leadership.
The strongest of these zerg broods, Zagara Brood, was led by Zagara. Following Kerrigan's defeat and de-infestation on Char, the Zagara brood remained there, seeking large egg piles in an acid marsh. Despite General Horace Warfield's extermination campaign against the zerg remaining on the planet, the brood was able to thrive. Its prosperity was interrupted however, when Kerrigan returned to Char and subdued Zagara, thereby putting the brood under Kerrigan's control.


==== Sarah KerriganEdit ====

Sarah Kerrigan, "The Queen of Blades", is the de facto leader of the Zerg Swarm and mentor to broodmother Zagara. Voiced by Glynnis Talken Campbell in StarCraft and Brood War and by Tricia Helfer in Wings of Liberty, Heart of the Swarm, and Legacy of the Void. Kerrigan serves as the primary antagonist of all but the first and last two games.
Originally a Terran ghost agent for Arcturus Mengsk, she is betrayed and abandoned to the Zerg, who transform her into a Terran/Zerg hybrid with vast psionic powers under the control of the then unknown Amon. Following the death of the Overmind, Kerrigan asserts her independence, striking out at those who betrayed her and who seek to contain her, eventually taking control of the entire Zerg Swarm. Four years later, Kerrigan invades the Dominion in search of a number of Xel'Naga artifacts; these artifacts are instead retrieved by Raynor at the behest of the Moebious Foundation, who assembles them into a device that reverts Kerrigan to a human and releases Amon's grip on her. After her deinfestation, Kerrigan is mercilessly pursued by Arcturus Mengsk, however she successfully escapes Arcturus's Dominion forces. After willingly allowing herself to be reinfested on Zerus, Kerrigan is reborn as the Primal Queen of Blades, after which she successfully reunites the Zerg Swarm and storms the Dominion capital of Augustgrad on the planet Korhal with help from Raynor's Raiders. After a showdown with Arcturus Mengsk inside his Palace, Kerrigan manages to gain the upper hand with help from James Raynor, and kills Acturus by overloading his body with psychic energy, causing him to explode spectacularly. In the aftermath of her victory, Kerrigan gathers the Swarm and departs in search of Amon.
According to Zeratul, Kerrigan factors prominently into a Xel'Nagan prophecy concerning the Zerg, the Protoss, and the Hybrids. Heart of the Swarm reveals that Kerrigan is the only being powerful enough to stop the fallen Xel'naga Amon, though exactly how is not revealed. Though originally intended as a throwaway character, Kerrigan grew on the developers, who gave her a greater role in the series. Talken Campbell described Kerrigan's transformation as "going from good girl to bad girl"; many of the aspects of Kerrigan's infested character design are inspired by the Greek gorgon Medusa. IGN rated Kerrigan as the fifth most memorable video game villain, while readers of GameSpot put Kerrigan as the most evil video game villain.
During the events of Legacy of the Void, Kerrigan enters into an alliance with Artanis while investigating the Xel'Naga homeworld Ulnar. Some time after Artanis's reclamation of the Protoss homeworld of Aiur, Kerrigan sends a psionic call to Raynor and Artanis for assistance in permanently killing Amon in the Void. During the joint Terran Dominion/Zerg/Protoss assault of the Void, the full context of Zeratul's prophecy about Kerrigan is made clear: Only a fellow Xel'Naga is capable of killing Amon, and only Kerrigan is capable of ascension. With the remainder of the joint armada, Kerrigan is successful in killing Amon during her psychic backlash in the void. During the aftermath, Kerrigan returns to Raynor in human form and disappears.


==== ZagaraEdit ====
Zagara is a zerg broodmother, Kerrigan's second-in-command, and the former leader of the Zagara Brood. In the absence of the Queen of Blades, Zagara sought to reunite the Swarm under her own leadership. She rallied the feral zerg of Char to her side, and managed to hold out against the genocidal forces of General Horace Warfield. However, her brute tactics prevented her from achieving victory. When Kerrigan returned to Char, Zagara challenged her authority. Kerrigan now appeared human and therefore, in Zagara's perspective, was unworthy to lead the Swarm. Kerrigan was able to control far more zerg than Zagara anticipated however and the broodmother was defeated. Kerrigan was about to kill Zagara, who revealed that she was only doing what she was told: "to be strong and to lead by force of will". Zagara vowed of follow Kerrigan because her will was strongest. The broodmother was forgiven and joined Kerrigan's Zerg Swarm forces.


== Other charactersEdit ==


=== ShapeshifterEdit ===
The shapeshifter was an enigmatic and mysterious character in the StarCraft Universe. Very little is known about this creature, beyond the fact that shapeshifter belongs to an unidentified alien race and was by its own admission several thousand years old. In each case that the shapeshifter has appeared in a meaningful role the creature has assumed the form of a Terran Male. The Shapeshifter's allegiance was to the fallen Xel'Naga Amon, and accordingly its actions were to further Amon's own goals.
The shapeshifter makes its initial appearance as Samir Duran, an enigmatic ex-Confederate Ghost operative introduced in Brood War, where he was voiced by Paul Ainsley. Duran was highly intelligent and manipulative, as well as knowledgeable about both the Protoss and Zerg. A former lieutenant in Alpha Squadron, Duran formed a small commando unit after the fall of the Confederacy to fight Mengsk's Dominion. Duran quickly allied with the United Earth Directorate's expeditionary force, and used UED resources to mount an assassination attempt on Mengsk and provided vital intelligence and strategic advice on the Dominion to DuGalle. However, Duran convinced DuGalle to destroy the psi disruptor, to Stukov's chagrin, and as the UED closed in on Mengsk and his allies, Duran sabotaged a key operation, allowing the emperor to escape. When Stukov reconstructed the psi disruptor, Duran killed him and revealed his allegiance was actually to Sarah Kerrigan. With Duran as her advisor, Kerrigan successfully established command over the entirety of the Zerg Swarm. However, Duran vanished shortly afterwards. In a secret mission, he was discovered by Zeratul engineering a Protoss/Zerg hybrid. Duran ominously explained he "had many names throughout the millennia", that his work has little to do with Kerrigan and that he served "a far greater power".
Four years after the events of Brood War, the shapeshifter reemerged in the Korpulu Sector, now going by the persona Dr. Emil Narud - an enigmatic scientist first introduced in Wings of Liberty and later appearing in Heart of the Swarm, voiced by Armin Shimerman. Narud was the head of the Moebius Foundation and was viewed as a genius on Zerg biology and an expert on Protoss and Xel'Naga technology.
In Wings of Liberty, Narud and the Moebius Foundation backed Tychus Findlay's contact with James Raynor as a way to get around an imperial decree from Arcturus Mengsk which made it illegal to traffic in alien goods. Narud would later appear by proxy as the Moebius Foundation's representative during a mission briefing on Tyrador, wherein Narud lent James Raynor his medical transport ships to help Raynor destroy the foundation's data cores in order to prevent the Queen of Blades from gaining access to them. On the eve of the invasion of Char, Raynor learned from Valerian that Narud had been working with the Dominion's Crown Prince for the entire duration of the game. In the aftermath of the successful de-infestation of the Queen of Blades, a civil war erupts between Arcturus and Valerian; in an attempt to find a safe haven, Valerian and Raynor seek shelter with the Moebius Foundation. Initially, Narud greeted and temporarily sheltered the group, but after examining the Xel'Naga artifact and thoroughly questioning Raynor about Kerrigan, Narud revealed his allegiance to Arcturus and sold out the group to an incoming Dominion fleet, but the fleet's attempt to kill Kerrigan fails.
Narud later reappeared in Heart of the Swarm after former UED Vice Admiral Alexei Stukov contacted Kerrigan with a message to seek out the Skygeirr Station research facility orbiting Ketill IV. Upon her arrival at the facility, Stukov explained to Kerrigan that Skygeirr housed the Dominion's primary Hybrid research and development laboratory, and that "Emil Narud" was actually an ancient shapeshifter in the employment of a fallen Xel'Naga named Amon. After the Zerg swarm breached the interior of the facility and began attacking the Hybrids within, Narud made his initial appearance, broadcasting a message throughout the facility to inform Kerrigan that she was not welcome in the station. After the Swarm breached the lowest level, Narud personally moved to kill Kerrigan by driving a null zone towards the Queen of Blades. When the null zone attack failed, Narud retreated inside a Xel'Naga temple dedicated to Amon. In a showdown with Kerrigan, Narud taunted the Queen of Blades by using his shapeshifting abilities - first morphing into Jim Raynor, and then into Kerrigan's own human form, in which he wounded Kerrigan with a psi blade similar to that wielded by the Protoss. Kerrigan gained the upper hand in the end, impaling Narud with her wing-spikes. With his dying breath, Narud proclaimed that Amon had been resurrected and that she would see him soon.
After Blizzard confirmed Duran's return in Heart of the Swarm, and tacitly implied that he may have appeared in Wings of Liberty. many assumed that the character was reincarnated as Emil Narud. To support this position fans point to the fact that Narud was revealed in Heart of the Swarm to be an ancient shapeshifter serving Amon (fitting his description of himself in Brood War as "a servant of a far greater power"), and moreover, "Narud" is "Duran" spelled backwards. Although this was observed and commented/discussed by fans in the series, Blizzard made no definitive effort to merge the two characters until the release of Whispers of Oblivion, a three part prequel campaign to Legacy of the Void. In Whispers of Oblivion, Zeratul confirmed that Samir Duran and Emil Narud were indeed the same individual.


=== AmonEdit ===
Amon is the primary antagonist of the StarCraft II: Legacy of the Void expansion. He is described as a malevolent Xel'naga and is the mastermind behind the Protoss-Zerg hybrids. His ultimate goal is to remake creation in his image (the hybrids).
Amon is first alluded to in a discussion between Duran and Zeratul in the Brood War mission Dark Origin, in which he is described as "...a far greater power, a power that has slept for countless ages and is reflected in the creature within that cell." In Wings of Liberty Zeratul's investigation into the Hybrids reveals that Amon's coming has been foretold; initially, he is described as "one who shall break the cycle of the gods." On Zhakul, Amon's role in the Ulan prophecy is further elaborated on, and it is here that he is first referred to as the "fallen one." After arriving on Aiur to retrieve the surviving memories from the remains of the Overmind, Zeratul encounters the spirit of Tassadar; from both beings Zeratul gains a glimpse into one possible future in which the Overmind foresaw Amon successfully employ his hybrids and the Zerg to annihilate the Protoss before turning on and wiping out the Zerg. In this future, Amon taunted the Protoss by revealing Kerrigan to be the only one in a position to oppose him.
In Heart of the Swarm Amon's identity and initial background are revealed. Amon came to Zerus after the other Xel'naga molded the Zerg. Desiring the Zerg's power to absorb the essence of their prey for his own goals, he connected many Zerg to a hivemind and later forced an overriding directive on the Overmind: the destruction of the Protoss. Millennia before the start of the series, Amon died under unknown circumstances, but work on the hybrids continued under the direction of the shape shifter Emil Narud. Sarah Kerrigan learned about Amon when she traveled to Zerus, and came to realize his lingering influence over the Zerg swarm was a major reason behind her crimes as the Queen of Blades. Kerrigan later learned about Narud's attempts to restore Amon to life, and attacked the shape-shifter's lab in order to stop him. Although Kerrigan defeated Narud, the shape-shifter used his dying words to reveal that he had already accomplished his goal: Amon had returned. Reflecting on her fight with Narud, Stukov speculated that the Xel'naga device used to de-infest Kerrigan may have actually had a hand in somehow reviving Amon. He noted that the original Queen of Blades had tremendous power, and that the device couldn't just simply erase it, surmising that it had to "go somewhere." After exacting her revenge on Arcturus Mengsk, Kerrigan took the Zerg swarm to hunt down Amon to try to keep him from enslaving the Zerg again.
In the Whispers of Oblivion campaign released by Blizzard ahead of the upcoming Legacy of the Void, Amon is revealed to have been resurrected in the Sigma Quadrant's Atrias System. Since his resurrection he has been under the protection of the Tal'Darim, a fanatical Protoss branch devoted to Amon.
In addition to the above-mentioned names, Amon is also referenced as "a malevolent presence within the void" by Zeratul in Wings of Liberty, the "Dark Voice" in the game captions, and "the dark god" in the prequel Whispers of Oblivion campaign. During his auditory taunts in the Wings of Liberty mission In Utter Darkness, a pair of glowing red eyes can be seen, but there is little else visually distinguishable about the character in the mission despite the fact that raw data exists for Amon in the map editor.
Chris Metzen has revealed that Amon will be the main villain in Legacy of the Void. He seizes control of the Khala, controlling most of the Protoss as they attempted to retake Auir. Zeratul and other protoss who had their nerve cords cut were immune to that control.


== MerchandiseEdit ==

The characters of StarCraft have been popular enough to inspire the creation of several collectable statues and toys. The first series of statues was released by ToyCom in 2003, consisting of a firebat with markings similar to some original StarCraft concept art for the firebat, a hydralisk and one of Tassadar with a ceremonial sword, which is also seen in concept art for the original game. A series of toys were also made available in 1998, featuring two variations of the marine, another hydralisk and a Protoss zealot. In addition, 1/30 scale model kits for the marine and hydralisk were released in 1999 by Academy Hobby Model Kits.
A second series of collectable statues, which included infested Kerrigan, Zeratul and a Terran ghost, was in development but appears to have been cancelled. However, upon announcement of StarCraft II in 2007, Blizzard released a new collectable statue depicting Wings of Libery mascot character Tychus Findlay.


== Critical receptionEdit ==
The characters and story of the StarCraft series have been received with praise and only minute criticism by many game reviewers. The GameSpot review of StarCraft described the voice acting as "great", stating that it brings the characters to life. GameSpot goes further in the review for Brood War, commenting that the story and dialogue is with only a few exceptions "brilliantly written" and "one of the year's best stories in any gaming genre". The reviewer of StarCraft for IGN praises the melding of the story into the gameplay and implies that the development of the characters during the course of the story, particularly that of Kerrigan, is unforgettable. In addition, the review of Brood War puts the storyline as "solid".
Gaming Revolution echoed this praise, saying the plot is "fantastic", but the reviewer added that he felt it was "over too quickly". At GamePro.com, the reviewer cited that he felt "the characters were talking to me" and even expressed a development of an emotional attachment to the character of Raynor. Electric Playground put the story as the best part of the game, if a little derivative, but described the voice acting as "really quite excellent".


== See alsoEdit ==
Characters of Diablo, one of the three primary franchises of Blizzard Entertainment
Characters of Warcraft, one of the three primary franchises of Blizzard Entertainment


== NotesEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Sons of the Storm, the official site of a number of Blizzard Entertainment concept artists.