Madanapalle is a city in Chittoor district of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is located in Madanapalle mandal of Madanapalle revenue division, which is also the mandal and divisional headquarters. This town is also known for its high quality silk, which are spun into saris and other types of clothing.


== EtymologyEdit ==
The name of the town was originally Maryaada raamanna puram which changed to "Madanapalle". It is one of the biggest Revenue Divisions of the Chittoor district.


== HistoryEdit ==
The history of Madanapalle dates back to 907 AD in the reign of Nischal Kingdom. Earlier, the town was located to west of Sri Yogabhogeswara Swami Temple. Upon vastu sastra corrections, Palegar Sriman Ahobilanayani thought about changing the location of the town. They left a cow to graze the grass. The cow started grazing the grass along the forest and stopped at a particular place. That was the place decided for initiation of construction of new town. Ahobilanayani varu constructed fort around the town. Later on it destroyed with the age. The present streets in Madanapalle like Kota Street, Agarthala street, Sepoy street are the reminiscences of previous establishments.
Madanapalle was ruled by Vijayanagara Palegars namely Basanna and Madanna. In memory of their names, the two hills on the east of Madanapalle were named as “Madanna Hill” and “Basavanna Hill” which gradually transformed to Madinikonda and Basinikonda. During 907 – 955, Yadavanayikas and Hoyasalas ruled by Vijayanagara Empire. After its downfall, it went under the rule of Golkonda nawabs during 1565. During 1713, the Kadapa Nawab, Abdul Nabi Khan captured Madanapalle. Madanapalle was transformed from Karnataka provinson to Kadapa division. There was war between Kadapa Nawabs and Maharastra rulers for the sake of Madanapalle and Punganur provision. Kadapa Nawab was defeated by Balajirao Peshi and captured Madanapalle later Tipu Sultan annexed it before falling to the British.

Sir Thomas Munro was first collector of Cuddapah. He constructed a small thatched house at the present Collector’s bunglow and visited Madanapalle every summer. In 1850, Madanapalle was developed as subdivision and F.B.Manoly was the first Sub Collector. The town experienced several natural calamities like floods, famines and epidemics.
Rabindranath Tagore translated "Jana Gana Mana" from Bengali to English and also set it to music in Madanapalle. The National Anthem was written by Rabindranath Tagore as early as in 1911 and was sung at the annual session of the Indian National Congress at Calcutta on December 27 that year. But it was actually done in Besant Theosophical College, Madanapalle, where Tagore stayed for few days in February 1919 that the now familiar tune was set. It was Margaret Cousins, wife of educationist, Dr. James Henry Cousins, who composed the tune for ‘Janaganamana.’ Dr. Cousins was then the Principal of the Madanapalle College that was established by Dr. Annie Besant.


== GeographyEdit ==
It is located at an average elevation of 695 m (2,280 ft) above mean sea level.
Madanapalle is located at 13.55°N 78.50°E﻿ / 13.55; 78.50.
Source : Climate
Madanapalle has pleasantly mild, to warm summers with average high temperatures of 30 to 35 degrees Celsius (86 F to 95 F). Temperatures do not exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 F)and winters are cold with temperatures between 7 to 15 degrees Celsius ( 44.6 F to 59 F). Usually summer lasts from March to June, with the advent of rainy season in June, followed by winter which lasts till the end of February.


== DemographicsEdit ==
As of 2011 Census of India, the town had a population of 135,669. The total population constitute, 67,432 males, 68,237 females and 13,448 children, in the age group of 0–6 years. The average literacy rate stands at 81.40% with 99,486 literates, significantly higher than the national average of 73.00%.


== PoliticsEdit ==
Madanapalle is an assembly constituency in Andhra Pradesh and the constituency number is 283.


== EconomyEdit ==
The economy is based on agriculture and main products include tomato, mango, groundnut, tamarind and silk saris. Madanapalle is famous for agricultural products such as tomato, mango, groundnut, tamarind etc., Madanapalle is the biggest tomato market in Andhra Pradesh. The tomatoes from here are supplied to the most of the southern states & some of the northern states of India.
It is also famous for silk and silk products like saris and other casuals. The quality of silk product is recognizable. You can get silk sarees here at production cost. These are supplied to all major cities in South India including Bangalore, Chennai and all silk product towns for sales. Madanapalle surroundings have enormous reserves of granite.


== TransportEdit ==
Madanapalle is very well connected by road and rail. There are three Bus terminals in Madanapalle. State owned APSRTC buses run to different parts of the district, state and interstate - Bangalore (KA), Mysore, Bellary and Chennai (TN), Vellore. Madanapalle Road Railway Station (MPL) is situated on the Tirupati - Guntakal BG line and all the trains stops here. Trains are available here to travel to Guntakal and Secunderabad. Daily trains are available from and to Guntakal & Tirupati. Other nearest Railway Station is Kurabalakota Railway Station where only Passenger trains stops.


== EducationEdit ==
Madanapalle is the place of oldest educational institutions like Besant Theosophical College, Rishi Valley School, Besant Theosophical College is one of the oldest colleges in the Rayalaseema Region of Andhra Pradesh. It was established much before Sri Venkateswara University was established.
Zilla Parishad High School, is an old and meritorious school founded in the year 1924, Rishi Valley School is an Indian boarding school, founded by the philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti. 


== See alsoEdit ==
List of cities in Andhra Pradesh by population
List of municipalities in Andhra Pradesh


== ReferencesEdit ==