The Warriors novel series is written by Erin Hunter. Due to the large number of characters present in the novel series, this list is divided by Clan, i.e., all characters in ThunderClan are listed together.


== Naming convention ==
Many of the characters in the Warriors novel series undergo a number of name changes. In most cases a character is given an individual "first" name by their mother upon birth, based on a particular physical or behavioral trait such as fur colour (Cinder-, Ash-, Fire-), other animals (Sparrow-, Hawk-, Jay-), disabilities (Torn-, One-, Crooked-), the natural surroundings (Leaf-, Holly-, Breeze-), or previous family or Clan members (Tigerstar and Tigerheart, for example).
The first name serves as the first half of the character's name, to be followed by a "suffix" name based on the character's position within the Clan. Kittens are given the suffix of -kit, while apprentices are given -paw. When the character reaches warrior status, the Clan leader selects a new suffix name for them based on another trait such as personality (-heart), appearance (-foot, -fur, -pelt), in one case, choosing the suffix in honor of a previously fallen warrior, (-feather), environmental conditions or locations (-pool, -shine, -frost), or an act of doing something, (-flight, -leap, -step).
All Clan leaders take the suffix -star and deputies retain their warrior name until made leader. An interesting side note is that warriors mentored by the current leader seem to have a better chance of becoming the next leader (Examples: Fireheart - mentored by Bluestar, Brambleclaw (mentored by Firestar), Brokentail (mentored by Raggedstar), or Bluefur (mentored by Sunstar).
Characters not belonging to the five "original" Clans (ThunderClan, RiverClan, WindClan, ShadowClan, and SkyClan) typically do not follow a standard naming structure and do not have suffix names. SkyClan cats were driven out of the forest. They live comfortably in a gorge that is some distance from where the other Clans live. Additionally, the Tribe of Rushing Water follows its own naming convention, which is detailed below.
When a kit is born in the Tribe, it is named after the first thing its mother sees, and Rock comments that it should lead to many cats being named "Wall of Cave", "Floor of Cave", or "Roof of Cave".


== Gender ==
The way gender is denoted in Warriors is somewhat similar to how they are denoted for wolves. Females are called she-cats, and males are called toms. Female kittens are referred to as she-kits in the novels.


== ThunderClan ==
ThunderClan is named after its first leader and founder, Thunder, and is the main Clan of the Warriors series, as all four series' protagonists are ThunderClan cats. During the original series, ThunderClan resides in the forest, sandwiched between RiverClan and ShadowClan on each side. They share very little territory borders with WindClan, and as such most of the trouble ThunderClan is forced to deal with originates either from RiverClan or ShadowClan. ThunderClan cats are accustomed to stalking through the thick underbrush of the forest, and are the sole users of the "hunter's crouch", a stalking technique used to hunt most forest-born prey in which a cat crouches down, stores energy in hind legs, and springs onto the target. Their main diet includes mice, voles, squirrels, rabbits, thrushes, magpies and shrews.
ThunderClan, along with the other Clans, undergoes a dramatic shift in territory during the course of the New Prophecy series. During the time that Brambleclaw, Squirrelpaw and the others are on their journey, much of ThunderClan's territory is destroyed as the Twolegs proceed with their deforestation of the area. Eventually ThunderClan and the other Clans are able to relocate to the lake territory, the ThunderClan camp of which is set in an abandoned quarry. The camp is protected by high walls of stone, but the surrounding territory is similar to the forest in which ThunderClan previously inhabited. As such, their sources of prey remain largely unchanged from the original series. Like many of the other Clans, ThunderClan's role is largely undefined in this series, due to the drastic changes all Clans are forced to undergo and adapt to. Some ThunderClan cats include: Firestar, Brambleclaw, Leafpool, Sandstorm, Spottedleaf, and Graystripe, Dovewing, Ivypool, Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Hollyleaf.


=== Bluestar's Prophecy ===


==== Pinestar ====
Pinestar, a red-brown tom with green eyes, was the leader of ThunderClan when Bluestar was born. When he only had one life left, he decided to step down as leader and become a house cat. He was Leopardfoot's mate and the father of Tigerstar, grandfather of Tawnypelt, Bramblestar, Hawkfrost, and Mothwing (Tigerstar's kits) and great-grandfather of Flametail, Dawnpelt, and Tigerheart (Tawnypelt's kits). He was accepted by StarClan when he did die, however, and gave Bluestar a life, the gift of compassion.


==== Sunstar ====
Sunstar, a bright ginger tom with green eyes and yellow tabby stripes, was the leader before Bluestar. He was the deputy of ThunderClan in Bluestar's Prophecy and his warrior name was Sunfall. He was Bluepaw's mentor, after her former mentor, Stonepelt, had to move to the elder's den, due to an injury that did not heal properly. Sunfall encouraged Bluefur every time she was downhearted, specifically after the deaths of Moonflower, Snowfur, and the "disappearance" of her kits, Mosskit, Stonekit and Mistykit. Sunstar became leader when Pinestar stepped down to become a house cat. Sunstar's original deputy, Tawnyspots, had to retire early (due to sickness), and Sunstar needed another cat to be deputy, a position which Thistleclaw wanted badly; however, he chose Bluefur instead because he thought Thistleclaw was too violent and Bluefur lost so much. Sunstar had a secret: because Pinestar still had one life left when Sunstar had his leader ceremony, StarClan only gave him eight lives, instead of nine. Sunstar later died after being weakened by sickness and unable to outrun a Twoleg dog. At Bluestar's leader ceremony, Sunstar gave to her the gift of courage. His brother was Featherwhisker, ThunderClan's medicine cat before Spottedleaf.


==== Moonflower ====
Moonflower is a silver-gray tabby queen with pale yellow eyes, mother of Bluestar and Snowfur, and mate of Stormtail. She is also the littermate of Goosefeather. Moonflower acted hostile towards Goosefeather when he wasn't watching Snowkit and Bluekit while they snuck into the medicine supplies and Snowkit ate two poppy seeds. Goosefeather believes she made a mistake in mating with Stormtail, since he really loved Dappletail instead. Moonflower and many other warriors joined in on an attack on the WindClan camp and she had to attack the medicine cat supplies. Hawkheart, the WindClan medicine cat, killed Moonflower. Since her death, Bluestar felt heavy with grief. At Bluestar's leader ceremony, she gave to her the gift of love, to cherish her Clan as she cherished her kits.


==== Snowfur ====
Snowfur is a white queen with blue eyes and gray ear tips. She is the sister of Bluestar. She and Bluestar had a strong sibling bond which was threatened by the events in when Snowfur falls in love with Thistleclaw and Bluefur disapproves as shown in Bluestar's Prophecy. She has one kit with Thistleclaw, Whitekit. Snowfur ends up dying when chasing ShadowClan intruders across the Thunderpath, and is run over by a Twoleg monster, which causes Bluefur to go into another cycle of grief. Snowfur also told her own story about what happened to Mosskit in Secrets of the Clans. She's daughter to Moonflower and Stormtail. Snowfur also gave Rosetail her name (when she was a kit) because of her pinkish-orange tail. At Bluestar's leader ceremony, she gave her the gift of pride, so that she knows her own worth and the worth of her Clan. She gave Bluestar's ninth life to her. Snowfur, while alive, teased Bluefur about liking Oakheart, a RiverClan warrior.


==== Thistleclaw ====
Thistleclaw is a gray-and-white tom with amber eyes. Bluestar suggests his name due to his spiky fur when they are both kits in the nursery. He is hot-headed and quite violent, making his relationship with Bluestar quite difficult. He was also mate of Bluestar's sister, Snowfur, and father of Whitestorm, Bluestar's nephew. He was also the mentor of Tigerpaw and one of the causes of Tigerstar's evil and ambitious motives. Thistleclaw at first seemed only arrogant and not interested in the long run of things, but later on, it was shown that he was highly paranoid, and wanted to keep other Clans out of ThunderClan territory by "marking the borders with blood". In Crookedstar's Promise Crookedpaw witnessed him training in the Dark Forest. He was shown to be highly violent, which was shown when he pushed Tigerstar so hard, the cat adopted his mentor's goals, arrogance, ambition, and thirst for blood. Another example of Thistleclaw's violent nature is when he ordered his apprentice, Tigerpaw, to attack Tiny (later Scourge) when he just walked onto the borders of ThunderClan, not knowing about the Clans at the time, as described in the manga The Rise of Scourge and the super edition Bluestar's Prophecy. Goosefeather, when he was described as insane, had a vision with Bluefur, and saw Thistleclaw's pelt dripping in blood, symbolizing the trail of death that he would leave if he ever ascended to leader. Goosefeather says that he could lead ThunderClan down a path of blood if he became a leader instead of Bluefur. When he died, he was found with claws unsheathed, lips in a snarl, and lying in a pool of his own blood, just as Bluestar and Goosefeather saw in their shared vision. In Night Whispers, he is shown as managing the training session in the Dark Forest. In Sign of the Moon, he kills Antpelt in training. He's also son to Poppydawn and Windflight and brother to Sweetpaw and Rosetail.


==== Goosefeather ====
Goosefeather is a speckled gray tom with pale blue eyes and brother of Moonflower. He was the medicine cat of ThunderClan when Bluestar was born and interprets a piece of prey (a vole with its fur bent over like a forest being blown down by wind) as a warning from StarClan that WindClan will destroy ThunderClan. He suggests that the only way to stop this was to destroy WindClan's medicine supplies; in the ensuing battle, his sister dies and many cats are injured, with Stonepelt's injuries forcing him to retire early. He was the mentor of Featherwhisker, the medicine cat before Spottedleaf. He interprets a burning branch as an omen that Bluestar is fire and will burn through the ranks of ThunderClan and will be destroyed by water. After that, Goosefeather seems to go insane. He sees Tigerkit as a dangerous monster (ironically, though no cat believed him, this proves to be true), and that Thistleclaw will lead ThunderClan to a path of blood if he becomes leader. Although many cats think Goosefeather is insane, some of his omens and prophecies are true. He even tells Bluefur that she has to give up her kits to save ThunderClan. At Bluestar's leader ceremony, he gave to her the gift of patience.


==== Featherwhisker ====
Featherwhisker is a pale silvery tom with amber eyes, long whiskers, and a sweeping, plumy tail. He was Goosefeather's apprentice when Bluestar was born and became Spottedleaf's mentor. He showed the elders' den to Bluestar and Snowfur when they were kits. He was more trusted in ThunderClan than Goosefeather, his mentor, and was often asked to help with things that Goosefeather should have been helping with. He worked tirelessly to save his Clanmates during the greencough epidemic, which ultimately killed him. After he died, Spottedleaf became the medicine cat. Featherwhisker is Sunstar's brother.


==== Leopardfoot ====
Leopardfoot is a sleek black queen with green eyes. She is sister of Patchpelt, Redtail, Willowpelt, and Spottedleaf, mate of Pinestar, and mother of Mistkit and Nightkit, who both died soon after birth, and Tigerstar. She was introduced in Bluestar's Prophecy as a five-month-old kit. She later on had her kits early and was weakened. She gave Tigerkit his tough name because he was the weakest of the litter. Her parents were Adderfang and Swiftbreeze. Her mate was Pinestar, who left the Clan to be a house cat shortly before Mistkit and Nightkit's deaths.


==== Swiftbreeze ====
Swiftbreeze is a tabby and white queen with yellow eyes. She is mother of Leopardfoot, Patchpelt, and in a later litter Willowpelt, Spottedleaf and Redtail. Swiftbreeze is mate to Adderfang, a brown tabby warrior. She was introduced in Bluestar's Prophecy as a queen who liked to show off about her kits.


==== Thrushpelt ====
Thrushpelt is a sandy-gray tom with a white flash on his chest and green eyes. He was a newly appointed warrior when Bluestar was a kit. He had a crush on Bluestar and everyone took notice, leading the Clan to believe he was the father of Stonefur, Mistystar, and Mosskit. Thrushpelt knew that the kits were not his, but kept Bluestar's secret until his death even though he never knew who their real father was. Bluestar told him that she knew she would have been happy with him.


==== Mosskit ====
Mosskit is a gray she-cat with white patches. She is the sister of Mistystar and Stonefur, and the kit of Bluestar and Oakheart. In Bluestar's Prophecy Mosskit freezes to death on the way to RiverClan. Bluefur buries her in the dirt below the snow so Mosskit is not eaten by foxes when the winter thaws. In Bluestar's Prophecy, she gives her mother a life as she becomes ThunderClan's leader after Sunstar. She also appears in Secrets of the Clans and The Last Hope.


=== Original Series ===
The original series covers events in the story from Into the Wild to The Darkest Hour. Many characters mentioned here were introduced in the original series, but many of them play minor or significant roles in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series as well. Characters listed in the other series may have been introduced in the original series, but play larger roles in the series they are listed in.


==== Firestar ====
Firestar, a flame-colored tom with green eyes, is the protagonist of the original series. Initially a kittypet with the name of Rusty, he often dreamed of hunting for his own prey in the forest beyond his owner's house (thus making him venture into the forest beyond his fence and garden). Rusty joins ThunderClan after encountering Graypaw, when he was caught actually trying to hunt prey in ThunderClan territory, and is initially established as an apprentice, being renamed Firepaw for his flame-colored pelt. Throughout the series, Firepaw gains respect within the Clan and eventually receives his warrior name of Fireheart at the end of Into the Wild, along with his best friend, Graypaw, renamed Graystripe.
At the end of Forest of Secrets, he becomes deputy, and finally, becomes ThunderClan's leader, Firestar at the beginning of The Darkest Hour, when Bluestar died from saving her Clan and Fireheart at the end of A Dangerous Path from the dog pack that Tigerstar used to try to destroy ThunderClan. Before Bluestar dies, she finally tells Fireheart that she was right about him, and that he was the "fire" in the prophecy, Fire alone can save the Clan, which she heard before he even joined ThunderClan. Firestar was mentored by Bluestar (and, for a short time, Lionheart and Tigerclaw), and has mentored three apprentices himself: Cinderpelt, who later becomes a medicine cat apprentice to Yellowfang due to her accident on the Thunderpath (which in fact, was set up by Tigerstar as a trap that was actually meant for Bluestar) that permanently injures her leg; Cloudtail; and Brambleclaw. Cloudtail is the son of his kittypet sister, Princess.
Fireheart met Princess when she was heavily pregnant in Fire and Ice. When her kittens were born, she let Firestar have her firstborn kit to be raised as a warrior with him to ThunderClan, where Bluestar named him Cloudkit. Firestar does not possess any significant character flaws and is fully committed to the warrior code. Only sometimes will he bend the rules to help his Clan. Firestar is fiercely loyal not only to his Clan, but also to his many friends and allies that he meets along the way, regardless of their affiliation. He respects the rules of his superiors, but also has the insight to look beyond them in order to properly judge a questionable situation. As a result, he often breaks the traditional rules of the Clan (a trend started by his very inclusion into the Clan, being of house cat, or kittypet origins) in order to help his friends or rectify a situation he believes to be right. He is primarily responsible, along with his friend Graystripe, for several feats that have ensured the well-being of all the Clans, such as retrieving WindClan after they were driven out of their camp in Fire and Ice, and hunting prey for RiverClan when they were damaged and forced to move out of their territory in a flood. In A Dangerous Path, he professes his long-time love for Sandstorm, who is revealed to love him back. He struggled with feelings for Spottedleaf, who died in Into the Wild. As a warrior, Fireheart earned Bluestar's disapproval for frequently helping the other Clans.
He led all four Clans against the ranks of BloodClan as LionClan in The Darkest Hour. He kills their leader, Scourge, and is seemingly killed by a fallen beech tree that burst into flames after being struck by lightning briefly after he killed Tigerstar in The Last Hope in order to save the Clans. However, Erin Hunter revealed that Firestar actually died from the wounds he received in the final battle with Tigerstar. Erin Hunter also disclosed that Firestar is Scourge's half-brother.
He appointed Graystripe as deputy after the battle against BloodClan in The Darkest Hour after Whitestorm, the former deputy, was killed by Bone, the BloodClan deputy. Firestar maintains a significant and often highly important presence in subsequent series, The New Prophecy, Power of Three, and Omen of the Stars as the ever-present leader of ThunderClan. Additionally, in between the original series and The New Prophecy, he travels north with his mate, Sandstorm, in order to reunite the lost and scattered descendants of SkyClan in Firestar's Quest. Also, he starred in the story for the Ultimate Leader competition, when he once more briefly unites the Clans, with heavy support from his mate, Sandstorm. Sandstorm dislikes him when he first joins ThunderClan and grows jealous when he receives his warrior name before her. Firestar also saves Sandstorm from falling over the gorge during a border fight with RiverClan in Fire and Ice.
He has two daughters with his beloved and long-time mate, Sandstorm: Leafpool and Squirrelflight. Both have leading roles in The New Prophecy series and side parts in the Power of Three and Omen of the Stars series. Firestar's father is a plump ginger tom called Jake, who is also the father of Princess and Scourge. Jake's other mate was the mother of Scourge, Ruby, Socks, and Quince. Firestar's mother is a tabby and white she-cat named Nutmeg. It is said on the Warriors app on iPhone and iPod that just before her kits were born, Nutmeg dreamed that one of them, a ginger tom, was standing on a huge rock out of her reach. She called for him to come down, but he did not seem to hear. He is also grandfather to Hollyleaf (who was thought to be dead up until The Forgotten Warrior), Lionblaze, and Jayfeather (Leafpool and Crowfeather's forbidden kits). Bluepaw met Jake earlier in Bluestar's Prophecy. Whitewing, Cloudtail's daughter, has two kits: Ivypool and Dovewing. Dovewing is one of the Three, and completing that trio are Jayfeather and Lionblaze. Ivypool trains with the Dark Forest, even though she doesn't want to anymore. She serves as a spy for the Three. Their powers are kept secret from the rest of ThunderClan, and the only cats who know about the powers are the Three that are not one of the three are, Ivypool, Cinderheart, Hollyleaf. Princess is Firestar's sister, making his former apprentice Cloudtail (Princess' son) his nephew, Whitewing (Cloudtail's daughter) his grand-niece, and Dovewing and Ivypool (Whitewing's daughters) his great grand-nieces.
In The Last Hope, Spottedleaf tells Jayfeather that the fourth cat in the prophecy "The end of the stars draws near. Three must become four to defeat the darkness that lasts forever" is Firestar. Later in the book, Firestar dies after defeating the spirit of Tigerstar. Firestar goes to StarClan while Brambleclaw becomes leader and is now Bramblestar.


==== Bluestar ====
Bluestar is a wise blue-gray she-cat with piercing blue eyes and a silver-tinged muzzle and tail. She was the leader of ThunderClan when Firestar (then known as Firepaw) first came to the forest which was during most of the original series. She is responsible for bringing Firestar into ThunderClan, a decision prompted by the alarmingly low number of apprentices in her Clan, and the prophecy "Fire alone can save our Clan". Bluestar serves as Firestar's mentor during his apprenticeship following a short time when Firestar is mentored by the senior warriors, and eventually appoints him as her deputy after Tigerstar's exile. She is known as a strong, calm leader.
Bluestar fell in love with Oakheart, a RiverClan warrior and brother to Crookedstar, during her days as a warrior (when she was named Bluefur, as seen in The Rise of Scourge and Bluestar's Prophecy). During this time another warrior of ThunderClan (Thrushpelt, as seen in Bluestar's Prophecy) began to show interest in her. She bore three of Oakheart's kits, but let the Clan believe Thrushpelt was the father, and Thrushpelt was kind enough to pretend for her. Out of her concern to the Clan, she became Clan deputy, but since she knew the Clan would never accept a queen nursing kits for a deputy, she secretly gave her kits to Oakheart to be raised in RiverClan. Only Mistykit and Stonekit made it to RiverClan, however Mosskit did not survive the journey because of the cold.
After she gave them up and returned to the camp, she scratched a hole on the back of the nursery wall, went back to her nest, and then screamed "My kits are gone!", so that the rest of the Clan would think that her kits were stolen by a fox or badger. Bluestar is able to suppress her feelings regarding her decision until Firestar, seeking to uncover the truth about Tigerstar's deception, causes the issue to be reopened. Her feelings of regret, combined with the shock of discovering her trusted deputy's plan to kill her, cause Bluestar to sink into a manic depression. She remains in this condition throughout the events of Rising Storm and A Dangerous Path, which worsens when the forest fire destroys the ThunderClan camp. She refuses to trust any of her warriors except Fireheart and Whitestorm, and declares war on StarClan for dooming her Clan, saying that StarClan had said fire would save the Clan, and instead fire had destroyed it. Her faith is restored in the final moments of A Dangerous Path, when in a dramatic scene she crashes into the leader of a pack of dogs, causing them to fall over the edge of the gorge and into the river. She dies shortly afterward after confiding in Fireheart that he truly was the "fire" that saved the Clan.
Bluestar retains an authoritative role in StarClan during the events of The New Prophecy and Power of Three series. She chose the chosen one from ThunderClan (Brambleclaw). She also told Firestar about SkyClan in Firestar's Quest.
Bluestar has two kits, Mistystar and Stonefur, in RiverClan, and is mentioned in Secrets of the Clans as having a third, Mosskit, who died young during the journey to RiverClan with her littermates due to the extreme cold. Currently Mistystar is the leader of RiverClan, while Stonefur, the previous deputy, was killed in The Darkest Hour by Blackfoot and Tigerstar, because he was "half-clan". She also has a sister named Snowfur. Whitestorm is Snowfur's son, thus making him Bluestar's nephew. Her maternal uncle was Goosefeather, the medicine cat before Featherwhisker. Goosefeather gave to Bluestar her own prophecy, "Like fire you will blaze through the forest, but beware even the strongest of flames can be destroyed by water". The prophecy meant that Bluestar's life would be destroyed by the pain of giving up her half-RiverClan kits and it can also mean that she'd die from being drowned in the river. Although Bluestar initially thought Goosefeather's prophecy her being fire and being defeated by water to be nonsense, Bluestar was killed by water.
Bluestar was first mentored by Stonepelt, but after Stonepelt was forced to retire due to an injury he got from battle against WindClan, Sunfall took over her training. After Lionheart's death, she mentors Firestar. She has also mentored Runningwind and Frostfur. Her sister was named Snowfur, her mother was named Moonflower, and her father was named Stormtail.


==== Graystripe ====
Graystripe is a long-haired gray tom with a dark gray stripe along his back, and yellow eyes. He is Firestar's first and best friend in ThunderClan. He meets Rusty in the forest close to Rusty's kittypet home and proceeds to attack him as if he were any other intruder. When Rusty joins ThunderClan as Firepaw, the two become great friends and often train and eat together. Graypaw's mentor was Lionheart, who was killed in Into the Wild. He becomes a warrior soon after the battle with ShadowClan to rescue ThunderClan kits with Firepaw at the end of Into the Wild.
Shortly after being promoted to a full warrior (he was named "Graystripe" because there is a gray stripe running down his back that is darker than the rest of his gray fur), Graystripe falls in love with a RiverClan she-cat, Silverstream, after she saves him from drowning, and starts to sneak out of camp to meet her. His friendship with Fireheart is strained due to Fireheart's need to cover for him while he is away, which included mentoring Graystripe's apprentice Brackenpaw in his place, and for a short time the two quarrel with each other. Eventually Graystripe is able to settle his issues with Fireheart, and their friendship continues. In the end of the original series, he becomes ThunderClan's deputy, due to Whitestorm's death, but is replaced by Brambleclaw when he was captured in Dawn.
Graystripe is a friendly, hearty character, serving as a comic relief character to some degree. He often makes quips or jokes in order to provide relief to a tense situation, but is able to focus himself during battles and concentrate on the objective at hand. He does not have any qualms about killing hated enemies of the Clan, and is responsible for the deaths of Darkstripe and also the accidental death of Whiteclaw, who fell off a gorge, Graystripe being unable to save him.
Graystripe has lived in more locations than any other cat in the series. When Silverstream died bearing his kits, Feathertail and Stormfur, Graystripe went to live with them in RiverClan for a while. He returned to ThunderClan in A Dangerous Path when Leopardstar tried to kill Firestar and Graystripe attacked her and saved him, upon which Leopardstar exiled him from RiverClan. In Dawn of The New Prophecy series, Graystripe was captured by humans, or "Twolegs" and lived as a kittypet for a time, which is described in further detail in The Lost Warrior manga series. While living as a kittypet, Graystripe met Millie, another kittypet, who helped him escape. After a long journey, the two finally returned to the Clans living at the lake. He returned to ThunderClan in The Sight of the Power of Three series, along with Millie as his new mate. He is currently a regular warrior, for Firestar lets Brambleclaw retain his position as deputy. Graystripe sometimes becomes a "substitute" deputy when Brambleclaw is out traveling.
He had two kits with Silverstream, Feathertail and Stormfur who go on to live in RiverClan. They fled to ThunderClan temporarily, along with Feathertail's (then Featherpaw and Stormpaw) mentor, Mistystar (then Mistyfoot), to escape Tigerstar's rule in RiverClan. His father is Patchpelt and his mother is Willowpelt. Feathertail was killed in Moonrise. Graystripe's mate, Millie, gave birth to three kits of her own, Briarlight, Bumblestripe, and Blossomfall in Eclipse. Graystripe has two grandkits, Pine that Clings to Rock and Lark that Sings at Dawn from Stormfur and his mate, Brook Where Small Fish Swim. Graystripe is currently an elder.


==== Sandstorm ====
Sandstorm is a pale ginger she-cat with green eyes. Sandpaw was an apprentice when Firestar first joins the Clan, and disliked Firepaw for formerly being a kittypet. Eventually, she warms up to Fireheart, a process initiated by Fireheart preventing her from falling over a cliff during a battle in Fire and Ice, thereby saving her life. When Fireheart is forced to take Sandpaw on a patrol mission, she begins to warm up to him, and is unexpectedly friendly and cheerful toward him. Over the course of the series, it becomes obvious that Sandstorm has fallen in love with Fireheart (revealed in Rising Storm by her cousin Cinderpelt), and by The Darkest Hour the two have become mates. Sandstorm is known for having a fierce personality and getting easily annoyed, but is also capable of being gentle, however, as seen by her interactions with Firestar, her children, Squirrelflight and Leafpool, and her grandchildren, Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, and Jayfeather.
She is noted as being the best hunter and one of the fastest runners in ThunderClan, and is an excellent fighter as well, resulting in her being present in many major battles. She was also one of the cats who volunteered to be bait for the dog pack thanks to her speed. The specifics regarding her knowledge of Firestar's ongoing relationship with her aunt Spottedleaf, his first love, are shown in Firestar's Quest in which she once again plays a major role, and in which Firestar confirms that he loves Sandstorm above all, and will 'for all the moons to come'. Also, in Cats of The Clans, Rock states that Sandstorm knows Firestar better than he realises, and better even than Spottedleaf, for all the dreams they have shared. She has two daughters, Leafpool and Squirrelflight, as well as three grandchildren, Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze. They are the kits of Leafpool and Crowfeather as confirmed in The Power of Three. She was mentored by Whitestorm and mentored Sorreltail and Honeyfern. At the end of Bramblestar's Storm, she retires to become an elder.
Redtail is her father and Brindleface is her mother. Ashfur and Ferncloud are her half brother and sister. She's granddaughter to Adderfang and Swiftbreeze (Redtail's parents) and Fuzzypelt and Robinwing (Brindleface's parents). She is niece to Frostfur, Dustpelt, and Ravenpaw (Brindleface's siblings) and Leopardfoot, Spottedleaf, Willowpelt, and Patchpelt (Redtail's siblings). She is cousin to Tigerstar, Mistkit, and Nightkit (Leopardfoot's kits), Graystripe and Longtail (Patchpelt's sons), Sorreltail, Sootfur, Rainwhisker (Willowpelt's kits) and Cinderpelt, Brackenfur, Thornclaw, and Brightheart (Frostfur's kits).


==== Tigerstar ====
 Tigerstar, a dark brown tabby tom with amber eyes and unusually long front claws, is the main antagonist of the original series and haunting many cats' dreams in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series. He also plays a major role in the Omen of the Stars series, leading the Dark Forest to train Clan cats and leading them into a fight against StarClan and the four Clans, and he threatens them to do so, if they back down.
Initially, he is Tigerclaw, a senior warrior among the ranks of ThunderClan when Firepaw is brought into the forest. The two never quite get along, and Tigerclaw's hostility towards Fireheart is even higher when Fireheart discovers his plan to rule the Clan. Tigerclaw is a master of deception and manipulation, and is able to go through with the death of his uncle, Redtail, (an act he himself committed) as appearing to be the work of Oakheart from RiverClan. By doing so, he plans to become deputy, but Bluestar appoints Lionheart as her deputy. When Lionheart dies later from wounds he sustained in a ShadowClan attack in Into the Wild, Tigerclaw becomes deputy, ensuring his eventual place as leader. When he finally becomes deputy, he secretly plots with Brokentail and his gang of rogue outlaws in order to kill Bluestar, while making the entire scene look like an attack that he was unable to defend against while a rogue would kill Bluestar. Fireheart discovers his plans, and as a result, Tigerclaw is exiled from the Clan.
As a rogue, Tigerclaw gathers a band of allies (including ShadowClan warriors Nightwhisper and Blackfoot) and kills Mousefur's brother, Runningwind. Tigerclaw then persuades ShadowClan into accepting him as their leader and becomes Tigerstar, the rank he worked so hard to achieve. From his new position of authority he is able to conceal his true nature from the Clans, and secretly lures a pack of wild dogs into ThunderClan's territory in order to get revenge on his former Clanmates while saving only his kits, Bramblekit and Tawnykit. Interestingly enough, he only plans to save his kits, but not his mate, Goldenflower. To set the final step of his plan in place, he kills Brindleface, who happens to be the mate of Redtail, who he killed as well, to give the dogs a taste for cat blood when they enter the Thunderclan camp. When this plan, too, is foiled by Firestar and the others, Tigerstar hatches a plan to rule the entire forest while employing the services of the ruthless BloodClan in order to intimidate the other Clans into submission. Just as he has betrayed all his other former allies, he intends to betray BloodClan once he rules all four Clans. However, Tigerstar underestimates the power of Scourge, the leader of BloodClan, who kills him in one blow when Scourge decides to take over the forest himself and rips Tigerstar open, taking away all of his nine lives at once. Scourge slices Tigerstar from his head, almost to his tail, slicing through seven major organs as listed in a field guide, and Tigerstar lives in agony for several minutes while Firestar, Tallstar, Leopardstar, and the ThunderClan, WindClan, and 'TigerClan'(ShadowClan and RiverClan) cats watch in horror as the nine lives of Tigerstar are ripped away, one by one.
In The New Prophecy series, Tigerstar visits his sons Brambleclaw and Hawkfrost in their dreams, preparing them to take over the Clans for him. It is revealed that he was denied access into StarClan, and was banished with Darkstripe to a dark, shadowy forest known as the Dark Forest (also called the Place of No Stars). He visits his two sons, Brambleclaw and Hawkfrost, in their dreams and teaches them battle skills and leadership tactics. While Brambleclaw is hesitant to be influenced by his father, Hawkfrost welcomes his advice and plots to take control of the Clans much in the same way as his father did. Brambleclaw killed Hawkfrost in Sunset.
Tigerstar also plays a role in the Power of Three series as a battle "mentor" to Lionblaze, along with his dead son Hawkfrost. The consequences of his actions do not appear to be causing any harm to the Clans; Lionblaze becomes a masterful fighter under Tigerstar's influence and excels in battle skills far beyond any other apprentice. Whether or not Lionblaze is part of yet another plan hatched by Tigerstar from the shadows remains to be seen, though it appears unlikely. He is able to communicate with living cats; however, StarClan has said that he should not be able to. In The Last Hope, he led the attack against the Clans, and when Hawkfrost, Darkstripe, and Brokenstar had died for the second time, he stepped forward, stating that the battle had only begun. He was killed by Firestar, fading away permanently.
Tigerclaw was originally mentored by Thistleclaw, a battle-hungry and aggressive cat (this only magnified Tigerstar's own aggressive personality). Tigerclaw takes Ravenpaw as an apprentice for a short time before Firepaw and Graypaw send him to live with Barley. He has taken two mates, Goldenflower and Sasha. He has five direct kits: Tawnypelt and Brambleclaw from Goldenflower, and Mothwing, Hawkfrost, and Tadpole from Sasha. Tadpole is not shown in the story because he drowned as a kit. It is revealed in Firestar's Quest that Tigerstar is a direct descendant of the kits of Birdflight, a SkyClan she-cat who was the mate of Cloudstar, the SkyClan leader, and she sheltered in ThunderClan during SkyClan's exile, with her two kits, Spottedpelt and Gorseclaw, who were at the time, to young to make the journey. This makes him part-SkyClan, along with his aunt Spottedleaf.
It is also revealed in Code of the Clans and then Bluestar's Prophecy that Tigerstar was the son of Pinestar, the old ThunderClan leader who left his Clan to be a kittypet while on his last life. His mother was Leopardfoot, who was Patchpelt's, Willowpelt's, Spottedleaf's and Redtail's sister, and his siblings were Nightkit and Mistkit, both she-kits, who died shortly after birth. He was the last born, and weakest of his litter. He's also a cousin to Sorreltail, Sootfur and Rainwhisker (Willowpelt's kits), Longtail and Graystripe (Patchpelt's kits) and Sandstorm (Redtail's kit). Grandcousin to Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Molepaw, Honeyfern, Seedkit, and Lilykit (Sorreltail's kits), Stormfur, Feathertail, Briarlight, Bumblestripe, and Blossomfall (Graystripe's kits) and Squirrelflight and Leafpool (Sandstorm's kits). Great grandcousin to Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze (Leafpool's kits) Cherrykit and Molekit (Poppyfrost's kits) and Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine) (Stormfur's kits). His grandsons are Flametail and Tigerheart, and his granddaughter is Dawnpelt(Tawnypelt's kits).
Lionblaze revolts against Tigerstar in Sunrise after learning that Tigerstar has always known that Squirrelflight wasn't Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, and Lionblaze's mother. Lionblaze is able to defeat him, but Tigerstar remains in the Dark Forest.
In The Last Hope he and the other Dark Forest cats start a war with StarClan and he leads an invasion of the ThunderClan camp along with Brokenstar. During the battle he fights Firestar, who, after a long fight, kills him a tenth time, causing him to die and fade away forever.


==== Cinderpelt ====
Cinderpelt, a dark gray she-cat with blue eyes, is ThunderClan's medicine cat beginning in the original series, and continuing for a large part of The New Prophecy series. Originally she trains to be a warrior as an apprentice under Fireheart's mentoring, but she is critically injured and therefore crippled by a monster when she stumbles into a trap laid by Tigerclaw for Bluestar, she permanently injures her leg and cannot become a warrior. Soon after she begins training as a medicine cat apprentice under Yellowfang, she receives the title of a full medicine cat in Forest of Secrets (though she is still called Cinderpaw until the beginning of Rising Storm). Cinderpelt is one of Firestar's closest friends throughout the series, and remains his trusted advisor whenever he needs spiritual guidance. Initially overexcited and bouncy, she often overwhelms Firestar as an apprentice and frequently dashes off on her own. After she begins training as a medicine cat, her personality greatly matures and she appears to possess the wisdom of a much older cat. She was in love with Firestar and she never stopped loving him, though Firestar himself never realizes this and Cinderpelt never tells him. Though she always wanted to be a warrior, she accepts her new destiny and dedicates her life to becoming a legendary medicine cat. Cinderpelt tried to save Silverstream while she was giving birth to Graystripe's kits. She loses Silverstream, but if not for her, the kits (Stormkit and Featherkit, later Stormfur and Feathertail) would have died. However, Cinderpelt blames herself for Silverstream's death.
Cinderpelt is killed in Twilight of The New Prophecy series while defending Sorreltail and her newborn kits in the nursery from a marauding badger. StarClan had originally destined Cinderpelt to be a warrior, and they did not plan on her being caught in Tigerstar's trap on the Thunderpath. As a test of her loyalty, StarClan told Cinderpelt of her impending death in Twilight before it happened, a secret which Cinderpelt kept hidden even when her apprentice, Leafpool, pledged to leave the Clan.
As a reward, Cinderpelt was reincarnated after her death into one of the kits she defended, Cinderheart in the Power of Three series. Cinderheart herself is not aware of this consciously, however she occasionally exhibits knowledge that she cannot explain from her previous life, and knows of her reincarnation in dreams. The implications of this "second life", as well as Cinderpelt's true destiny, have become realized when Jayfeather reveals it to her in a dream. Just before the battle in The Last Hope, Cinderheart chooses to be a warrior and Lionblaze's mate, and Cinderpelt leaves Cinderheart's body, whispering, "Thank you". Cinderpelt was mentored by Yellowfang, and mentored her cousin Sandstorm's daughter Leafpool as her successor. Her mother is Frostfur, which makes Thornclaw and Brightheart her siblings. Her brother, Brackenfur, is the father of Cinderheart, a situation which is slightly confusing given Cinderpelt's reincarnation. This would imply, then, that Cinderpelt's brother is now her father, though the new Cinderheart is still very much an individual cat in her own right. As Cinderpelt has a reincarnation, Cinderheart is related to Bluestar since Sorreltail's father was Whitestorm, who was Bluestar's nephew.


==== Spottedleaf ====
Spottedleaf is a beautiful, dark tortoiseshell she-cat, with amber eyes, a white muzzle, white paws, a white chest, a black-tipped tail, and a black, brown, and amber dappled pelt. Her eyes have circles of dark fur around them, and one is darker than the other. She also has a gold-and-black striped tail. She has played some minor and slightly major roles in series to date despite her early death in Into the Wild, after which she appeared in Firestar's dreams. Originally Spottedleaf was ThunderClan's medicine cat at the start of Into the Wild and foretold the original series prophecy "Fire alone can save our Clan". Firestar, when first introduced into the camp, immediately takes a liking to her and it is said that she begins to return his feelings. Unfortunately, she is killed by ShadowClan in an effort to protect the kits in an unfair fight with Clawface and Brokenstar during a raid by ShadowClan near the end of Into the Wild. and during the book Starlight, she is willing to protect Firestar with all the power of StarClan.
Spottedleaf is perhaps the most prominent member of StarClan, often serving as a spiritual guide to the main characters of each series, most notably Firestar, whom she falls in love with over the course of his adventures in the original series. She is often seen as a source of comfort, and presents cryptic warnings and messages to cats notifying them of future events. Being dead, she cannot serve any more prominent roles in the lives of the cats she watches over, a fact that is frequently a source of frustration to her regarding Firestar's budding relationship with her niece Sandstorm. It is revealed that she does indeed wish things were different between them, and continues to love Firestar despite their differences of existence. She accepts her position, however, and acknowledges Sandstorm in a dream of her own in order to reassure the living cat of Firestar's loyalty. Having not found an apprentice by the time of her death, Yellowfang is the new medicine cat when she joins ThunderClan. It is revealed in Firestar's Quest that Spottedleaf is a direct descendant of the kits of Birdflight, a SkyClan she-cat who stayed with ThunderClan during SkyClan's exile. Therefore she is part-SkyClan and permitted to walk in the skies of SkyClan's warrior ancestors as well as StarClan. It is also interesting to note that the same she-cat that stayed with ThunderClan after SkyClan left also had the ancestor of Tigerstar's line, making Spottedleaf related to Tigerstar, Brambleclaw, Mothwing, Hawkfrost, Tadpole, Tawnypelt, and Tawnypelt's kits Flametail, Dawnpelt, and Tigerheart.
Spottedleaf was mentored by Featherwhisker, the medicine cat before her. She walks in the dreams of Firestar, Leafpool, and Jayfeather. After Spottedleaf died, Yellowfang became the medicine cat, taking Cinderpelt as an apprentice following her accident. Her parents were Adderfang and Swiftbreeze, making her sister to Patchpelt, Leopardfoot, Willowpelt, and Redtail. She's also aunt to Mistkit, Nightkit and Tigerstar (Leopardfoot's kits), Sorreltail, Rainwhisker and Sootfur (Willowpelt's kits), and Sandstorm (Redtail's daughter), and great aunt to Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Hawkfrost, Mothwing and Tadpole (Tigerstar's kits), Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Honeyfern, and Molepaw (Sorreltail's kits), and Leafpool and Squirrelflight (Sandstorm's kits). She is great-great aunt to Tigerheart, Flametail, and Dawnpelt (Tawnypelt's kits), Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, and Jayfeather (Leafpool's kits), and Cherryfall and Molewhisker (Poppyfrost's kits).
In The Last Hope she and the other StarClan cats help fight the Dark Forest cats. During the battle, she attempts to beat Mapleshade. However, Mapleshade kills Spottedleaf, causing her to fade away forever.


==== Cloudtail ====
Cloudtail, a long-furred white tom with round blue eyes, is a ThunderClan warrior first introduced as a kit, Cloudkit, in Fire and Ice. He is the son of Princess, Firestar's kittypet sister, and an unknown tom, most likely a kittypet, and thus is Firestar's nephew. Upon learning that her kits are to be given away by her Twoleg owners, Princess gives her eldest kit to Firestar, because she wanted him to be a hero, like Firestar is. Initially, Cloudkit is rejected by many members of ThunderClan, including Bluestar herself, because of the Clan's reluctance to admit yet another kittypet into its ranks.
Cloudtail grew up as an arrogant, loudmouthed apprentice who often refuses to listen to his mentor, Firestar. He is quite slow to understand the warrior code and often takes selfish actions that benefit himself and not the Clan. His loyalty to the Clan is finally established when, after sneaking off to solicit food from Twolegs, he is captured and taken to a suburb on the other side of WindClan territory near Barley's farm. Firestar and Sandstorm rescue him with Ravenpaw's help. Upon his return to ThunderClan, he is pelted with questions and he refers to his time with the Twolegs as 'capture' and greatly exaggerates his tale. This event serves to firmly cement Cloudtail's place in the Clan, and he behaves in a much more mature manner towards his Clan thereafter.
Despite becoming a loyal warrior, Cloudtail has retained much of his attitude and is one of the most aggressive cats in the Clan; he is known for his sharp tongue and is often one of the first cats to jump at the prospect of a fight. Cloudtail does not believe in StarClan in the first series, making him one of two Clan cats in the series to do so (the other being Mothwing, the RiverClan medicine cat). He does show a significantly softer side when dealing with his mate, Brightheart, however. Cloudtail is primarily responsible for training Brightheart to be able to fight effectively despite her injuries. His personality taken aside, Cloudtail is friendly to most cats (provided they are not from another Clan). He is one of the best climbers and has the best tracking ability in the Clan.
Cloudtail has two daughters, and two sons. He first has one daughter with Brightheart, Whitewing. Later in The Last Hope, he and Brightheart have another daughter, Amberkit, and two sons, Dewkit and Snowkit. Being Firestar's nephew, he also shares kinship with all of Firestar's direct line, including Leafpool, Squirrelflight, and Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, and Lionblaze. During the second half of The New Prophecy series, he shows a brief interest in Daisy, a horseplace cat, though his interest in her is not because of any feelings of his own; he mentors her because of his defensiveness of his kittypet roots. He is unaware of the fact that Daisy is in love with him, but once he realizes he is hurting Brightheart, he resolves to stop spending time with Daisy. Cloudtail rekindles his love with Brightheart. Cloudtail has mentored Cinderheart, Rainwhisker, and Toadstep as well as temporarily training Flamepaw of ShadowClan when Tawnypelt and her kits briefly left ShadowClan for ThunderClan in Long Shadows. He's grandfather to Dovewing and Ivypool.


==== Brightheart ====
Brightheart, is a white she-cat with ginger patches along her back and a ginger tail and one missing eye and a disfigured ear, is a ThunderClan warrior introduced in Forest of Secrets. Brightheart was an apprentice, Brightpaw, for an unusually long period, along with her fellow apprentices Cloudpaw, Thornpaw, and Swiftpaw due to Bluestar's paranoia and refusal to trust her warriors following Tigerclaw's exile. Brightpaw develops a strong friendship with Cloudpaw, and is the first apprentice to congratulate him after his promotion to warrior status (received just for being Fireheart's apprentice) despite the other apprentices feeling jealous and angry. She eventually joins an expedition led by Swiftpaw into the lair of the dog pack during A Dangerous Path in an attempt to prove herself a warrior, which results in her being seriously injured as well as Swiftpaw's death.
Half of Brightheart's face is disfigured due to her injuries, including a missing eye and a scarred ear from a dog attack in A Dangerous Path. These features cause Bluestar to give her the warrior name of Lostface, which Firestar soon changes when he becomes leader. Though initially discouraged by her injuries, Brightheart is soon able to develop, with the help of Cloudtail, a system of fighting that makes use of her one-sided vision, making her as effective at fighting as any other warrior. She recoils from the sight of her own face and sometimes flinches when other cats are frightened by her scarred face. When not in battle, Brightheart is a kind and warmhearted friend to many warriors in the Clan. She adopts the duties of an unofficial medicine cat during the latter half of The New Prophecy series, becoming an object of Leafpool's jealousy, but quickly returns to being a warrior after Leafpool becomes ThunderClan's main medicine cat. In Twilight, Brightheart holds a grudge for Daisy, who often flirts and spends time with her mate, Cloudtail. However, after Leafpool points out to Cloudtail that he is hurting Brightheart (as he never loved Daisy, but is acting like he does), Daisy tells Brightheart that Cloudtail loves Brightheart, and by the Power of Three series, Cloudtail and Brightheart's relationship is as strong as ever.
Brightheart was apprenticed to Whitestorm, who also mentored her cousin Sandstorm, and had since taken Sandstorm's grandson Jayfeather as an apprentice, although this was only temporary due to Jayfeather later taking the role of medicine cat. She appears to have been hurt by this, likely due to her being desperate to prove to herself and the Clan that she can still function as well as a normal warrior. Despite Jaypaw's prickly attitude towards her during his apprenticeship, he is able to sense her feelings and is sympathetically warmer towards her upon becoming a medicine cat. Her mother is Frostfur, which makes her the littermate of Thornclaw, Cinderpelt, and Brackenfur. She and her mate, Cloudtail, currently have two daughters and two sons. Whitewing is their oldest daughter, born much earlier than her littermates. Later, Brightheart and Cloudtail have another daughter, Amberkit, and two sons, Snowkit and Dewkit, sometime during the course of The Last Hope. She is also aunt to Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart, and Molepaw (Brackenfur's kits) grandaunt to Cherrykit and Molekit (Poppyfrost's kits), and grandmother to Dovewing and Ivypool (Whitewing's kits).


==== Brackenfur ====
Brackenfur, a muscular golden brown tabby tom, is a ThunderClan warrior first introduced in Fire and Ice as an apprentice, Brackenpaw. He is the son of Frostfur and the littermate of Cinderpelt, Brightheart, and Thornclaw, and together they trained as apprentices under Firestar and Graystripe. Firestar often took over his training when Graystripe left the camp to meet with Silverstream even though meeting with cats outside one's own Clan is against the warrior code, upon becoming a warrior in Forest of Secrets.
He was considered by Firestar to become ThunderClan's deputy in Sunset, but was not chosen due to a sign from StarClan interpreted by Leafpool, making Brambleclaw deputy instead. He is greatly respected and liked throughout the Clan, and additionally is an excellent fighter, which allows him to be present in most battles.
In the New Prophecy series, Brackenfur takes Sorreltail as a mate, and has six kits with her: Molepaw (who dies of disease between The New Prophecy and Power of Three series), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern (who later dies in Sunrise by being bitten by a snake), Cinderheart, later revealed to be the reincarnation of Cinderpelt, his sister, as well as Lilykit and Seedkit, who are born in the Omen of the Stars series. He is grandfather to Cherrypaw and Molepaw (Poppyfrost's kits). Brackenfur has no apprentice currently but has mentored Tawnypelt (before she left ThunderClan to go to ShadowClan), Whitewing, and Hollyleaf. He also trained Tigerpaw of ShadowClan for a while when Tawnypelt and her kits left ShadowClan for ThunderClan in Long Shadows.


==== Ravenpaw ====
Ravenpaw, a sleek, almost all black (except for the tip of his tail and a little dash on his chest, which is white) tom with amber eyes, is a current loner, first introduced as a ThunderClan apprentice in Into the Wild. After Firepaw is accepted into the forest, he trains along with Graypaw and Firepaw and the three become good friends. Ravenpaw is nervous and shy around his Clanmates, mostly due to the fact that his mentor, Tigerclaw, treats him harshly and often belittles him in front of the other warriors. Part of this is because Ravenpaw saw Tigerclaw murder Redtail, the former ThunderClan deputy. Eventually Tigerclaw decides that Ravenpaw's storytelling abilities are too dangerous, and plots to kill him to keep his secret safe. Firepaw discovers this, and along with Graypaw shows Ravenpaw across the WindClan border to shelter in Barley's barn, while telling the rest of the Clan that he is dead.
Firepaw takes Ravenpaw to the barn, and he seems to enjoy his life with Barley. He loses his old nervousness and becomes much more confident and outgoing, while retaining a loyal debt of gratitude towards his former Clanmates. His situation is interesting present throughout the series: while some outsiders such as kittypets appear to have been born to live in a Clan, there are also Clan-born cats whose destinies lie elsewhere. Ravenpaw returns at various times throughout the series to lend assistance or shelter to cats traveling across his territory, most notably helping to feed and shelter all of the forest Clans during the beginning of their relocation in Dawn. Ravenpaw also assists Firestar and Graystripe in retrieving Graystripe's kits from RiverClan during Tigerstar's cruel leadership of the Clan in The Darkest Hour. He then returns to the Clan along with Barley to fight alongside ThunderClan and WindClan in the battle with BloodClan. While sheltering the forest cats in Dawn, Firestar asks Ravenpaw to rejoin ThunderClan and travel with them to the lake. Ravenpaw says no, stating that he is happier being a loner than he ever would be in a Clan. His parents were Robinwing and Fuzzypelt, making him brother to Frostfur, Brindleface, and Dustpelt, uncle to Brackenfur, Brightheart, Cinderpelt and Thornclaw (Frostfur's kits), Sandstorm, Ashfur and Ferncloud (Brindleface's kits), Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Birchfall, Hollykit, Larchkit, Icecloud and Foxleap (Dustpelt's kits), great-uncle to Squirrelflight and Leafpool (Sandstorm's daughters), Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Birchfall, Hollykit, Larchkit, Icecloud and Foxleap (Ferncloud's kits), Whitewing, Dewnose, Snowbush, and Ambermoon (Brightheart's kits), Honeyfern, Poppyfrost, Cinderheart and Molepaw (Brackenfur's kits), Rosepetal and Toadstep (Spiderleg's kits), and Dovewing and Ivypool (Birchfall's daughters). Ravenpaw gives Bramblestar his last life to speak out against injustice.
Ravenpaw currently has a manga series about him and his encounter with some old BloodClan cats.


==== Dustpelt ====
Dustpelt, a dark brown tabby tom with amber eyes, is a ThunderClan warrior introduced in Into the Wild as an apprentice. He had recently been made an apprentice, Dustpaw, when Firepaw initially joined the Clan. He was one of the cats that disliked Firepaw, like Sandpaw; however, this becomes less important as the story goes on. He becomes a warrior, Dustpelt, in Fire and Ice. Dustpelt favors his later mentor, Darkstripe's apprentice, Fernpaw. Originally an ally and strong supporter of Tigerclaw, Dustpelt was horrified to discover that Tigerclaw killed his mentor, Redtail, and rejected him in front of the Clan when Tigerclaw was exiled.
Though usually depicted as a grudging ally of Firestar throughout all three series, Dustpelt's loyalty to his Clan (and its "kittypet" leader) is of importance to him and he is a valued warrior as a result. Dustpelt is a skilled fighter, and is present in most attack parties. He is also a warm and dedicated father, having experienced the deaths of three of his kits, and makes sure to maintain a strong presence in both his kits' lives and that of his mate, Ferncloud.
Dustpelt's kits, both living and dead, include Hollykit, Larchkit, Shrewpaw, Foxleap, Icecloud, Birchfall, and Spiderleg, of which four are surviving. His grandchildren, Toadstep and Rosepetal, are the kits of Spiderleg and his mate Daisy, and Dovewing and Ivypool who are the kits of Birchfall and Whitewing. Throughout the course of the series Dustpelt has mentored Ashfur, Squirrelflight, and Hazeltail, as well as briefly mentoring Sorreltail for a time. He was mentored by Redtail, and Darkstripe following Redtail's death.
In Bramblestar's Storm, Dustpelt dies as a result of helping ShadowClan with a badger attack.


==== Darkstripe ====
Darkstripe, a sleek black and gray tabby tom, is an antagonist and a warrior in ThunderClan during most of the original series. He is a rude, nasty, and unpleasant antagonist who maintains a highly negative opinion of Firestar throughout the series. He is the closest friend and biggest supporter of Tigerstar, and as such is fiercely loyal to Tigerstar's ambitions despite their implications. Darkstripe routinely voices his negative opinions at Clan meetings, refusing to trust Firestar due to his kittypet origins and openly mocking any cat who thinks otherwise.
When Tigerclaw is exiled from ThunderClan in Forest of Secrets, Darkstripe voices his disappointment that Tigerstar did not include him in his plan to kill Bluestar (it is interesting to note that he did not appear to have a problem with Tigerstar's plan itself, but rather that he was not allowed to be a part of it). Darkstripe's lonely path of a devoted follower continues to reduce his popularity in the Clan, and in A Dangerous Path he begins secretly plotting with Tigerstar across the border in order to bring the dogs upon the camp and save only Tigerstar's children, Bramblekit and Tawnykit, from the ensuing chaos, but not Tigerstar's mate, Goldenflower. After this fails, he attempts to murder his half-sister, Sorrelkit (later Sorreltail), with deathberries when she discovers his meetings with Blackfoot, Tigerstar's deputy, and he is exiled from the Clan. Darkstripe immediately runs to Tigerstar's side and kills one of Bluestar's children, Stonefur, but when Tigerstar is killed by Scourge, Darkstripe is left completely alone. His resulting madness culminates in the battle with BloodClan during The Darkest Hour; he forsakes all loyalty to his Clan and desperately attempts to start a new one from inside of ThunderClan. He was killed shortly afterwards by his half-brother, Graystripe during the battle.
Darkstripe has mentored Longtail, Dustpelt, and Ferncloud, although his mentorship of Ferncloud was revoked when he was exiled from the Clan. He was mentored by Tigerclaw. His mother was Willowpelt and his father was Tawnyspots, and it can be implied from his personality that hardly any cat liked him very much. He is shown during the prologue of Sunset to be walking the Dark Forest/Place of No Stars like Tigerstar, Brokentail, and eventually Hawkfrost, and all of the other Clan cats that are considered traitors and evil.
In Code of the Clans, he is hunting with Longtail. When Longtail catches a plump squirrel, Darkstripe encourages them to eat it since prey is scarce. After eating it and returning to camp with a smaller catch, Poppydawn, who needs food, dies of a case of greencough. While Longtail feels guilty, Darkstripe does not care.


==== Longtail ====
Longtail, a pale tabby tom with black stripes, is a recurring ThunderClan warrior introduced in Into the Wild. He is the first to challenge Firestar due to his kittypet origins, and fights him when he first arrives in the Clan. This results in Firestar's collar being ripped off, which is then taken as a sign that he will be accepted into the Clan. Longtail's ear is torn, resulting in a scar. Longtail maintains a grudge against Firestar for much of the series, not only because an apprentice defeated him and gave him his scar, but also because he was a strong supporter of Tigerclaw, Firestar's chief rival.
Longtail's attitude slowly matures over the course of the series, and he develops an eventual respect for Firestar as a result of his repeatedly demonstrated courage, something Longtail lacks. He revokes his allegiance with Tigerclaw after his exile, and sets himself toward becoming a respected warrior within the Clan. His loyalty is further proven when he volunteers to be bait for Tigerstar's vicious dog pack. While he still resents Firestar to some degree, he realizes his Clan's safety is far more important and warns him of his cousin Tigerstar's dark schemes from across the border as well as his cousin Darkstripe's misplaced loyalty during Rising Storm and A Dangerous Path. Longtail eventually fights alongside Firestar against BloodClan during the events of The Darkest Hour, having finally found his true place within the Clan as well as Firestar's respect.
Almost ironically, Longtail is blinded shortly thereafter by a rabbit's claws in Firestar's Quest. He remains in the Clan as an elder throughout The New Prophecy and Power of Three series, despite being only slightly older than Firestar. He was mentored by Darkstripe and he has mentored Swiftpaw, his niece Ferncloud and his cousin Sootfur (before he was blinded). He also taught his great-great-nephew Jayfeather how to utilize his other senses without sight. He was killed by a falling tree in Fading Echoes while trying to retrieve a piece of fresh-kill for Mousefur. Longtail was the oldest tom and second oldest cat in ThunderClan. His parents were Patchpelt and Robinwing. Longtail is also half-brother to Graystripe.
In Code of the Clans, he is hunting with Darkstripe. When he catches a plump squirrel, Darkstripe encourages them to eat it since prey is scarce. After eating it and returning to camp, Poppydawn, who needs food, dies of a case of greencough. Longtail feels guilty for eating the squirrel that can save her life. Darkstripe does not care.


==== Mousefur ====
Mousefur, a small dusky brown she-cat, is a ThunderClan warrior introduced in Into the Wild. She is a respected warrior in the Clan and is known for having a fierce personality, similar to Cloudtail and Speckletail. Mousefur was one of the cats who volunteered to be bait for the dog pack. Mousefur is usually friendly to Firestar, but has been known to change her attitude towards him depending on the situation. Mousefur is often among any group of cats voicing a counter-opinion to a major decision, forcing the Clan to look at an issue from an opposite perspective. Despite her many arguments and aggressive pride, however, she usually ends up agreeing with the correct choice in a given situation.
Mousefur's age causes her to join the elders in Starlight in The New Prophecy series, where she currently remains. Since then she has fallen ill a number of times, more recently catching greencough and causing Jaypaw to experience his first medical epidemic as a medicine cat in The Sight. Mousefur and Longtail have become unlikely friends due to their sharing of the elders' den, and often playfully bicker back and forth similar to Yellowfang and Cinderpelt. Although, due to her stubbornness (or thoughtfulness) she sometimes refuses to take herbs or prey, insisting the younger cats need it more. She even volunteers to help take care of the sick cats in Long Shadows as she thinks that being an elder, her life is less valuable than the younger cats. She asked Brambleclaw this even though Firestar had already turned down her request, only to be turned down by Brambleclaw as well.
Mousefur has been a mentor to Thornclaw and Spiderleg. Mousefur's parents are Halftail and One-eye, and her brother is Runningwind.
Mousefur was killed inThe Last Hope in the Great Battle.


==== Thornclaw ====
Thornclaw, a golden brown tabby tom, first appears in Forest of Secrets as a young ThunderClan apprentice, Thornpaw. He is an apprentice for a large part of the original series, along with Brightpaw, Cloudpaw and Swiftpaw, mainly due to Bluestar's descent into paranoia during the last half of the original series and her refusing to trust any of her warriors. When she died, the newly appointed Firestar conducted his first naming ceremony on Thornclaw, finally making the young tom into a warrior.
Thornclaw's personality begins to show during The New Prophecy and Power of Three, where he is shown to be a warrior very similar to Brackenfur in manner and attitude. He is an excellent fighter and is often chosen to assist in battle parties and long-range patrols. Thornclaw, like Brackenfur, becomes slightly worried about the increasing numbers of non-Clan cats present in ThunderClan during the Power of Three series, as well as at Firestar for being too accepting of them. This is primarily due to increasing hostility from the other three Clans, who begin to make claims that ThunderClan is becoming diluted and weak. Despite these feelings, Thornclaw is always portrayed as a kind, caring, and patient cat and has never been shown to be disloyal. When Hollyleaf returns in The Forgotten Warrior he is among the cats who distrust her.
Thornclaw's mother is Frostfur, and his siblings are Brightheart, Brackenfur and Cinderpelt. As a result, Thornclaw is uncle to both Brightheart's and Brackenfur's kits, including Whitewing, Cinderheart, Honeyfern, Poppyfrost, Lilyheart, Seedpaw, Cherrypaw and Molepaw, and great uncle to Dovewing and Ivypool (Whitewing's kits) and Cherrykit and Molekit (Poppyfrost's kits). He was mentored by Mousefur and has mentored Sootfur, Shrewpaw, Poppyfrost and Briarlight. Thornclaw's also nephew to Brindleface (Frostfur's sister), grandson to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Frostfur's parents), cousin to Sandstorm, Ashfur and Ferncloud (Brindleface's kits), second cousin to Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Birchfall, Hollykit, Larchkit, Foxleap and Icecloud(Ferncloud's kits) and third cousin to Toadstep and Rosepetal (Spiderleg's kits) and Dovewing and Ivypool.


==== Whitestorm ====
Whitestorm, a large white tom with yellow eyes, was a senior ThunderClan warrior in the original series. He was one of the few cats who always treated Firestar with kindness when he is first brought into ThunderClan, and often gave him advice when he sensed that Firestar is troubled. Whitestorm was a gallant fighter, but was always more reserved rather than bloodthirsty and carries a thoughtful demeanor.
Though he was the most experienced senior warrior in the Clan, Whitestorm does not harbor any ambition toward becoming Clan leader and as such offers his wisdom to younger cats entirely out of good will. He assisted Firestar with the burdens of being Clan deputy during Bluestar's depression, and takes over for him occasionally when Firestar's duties call him elsewhere. Being Bluestar's nephew, as her sister Snowfur was his mother, Whitestorm was one of the warriors who were closest to her, and often stayed by her side in order to comfort her and maintain her sanity when she succumbed into paranoia through the later books. Eventually Firestar appointed Whitestorm as his deputy in appreciation for all his advice, a promotion he was unexpectedly pleased about (a trait that Firestar admires, given the ambitions of previous cats he had encountered). Whitestorm was killed by Bone during the battle with BloodClan in The Darkest Hour, his last wish being that Firestar appoint Graystripe as his new deputy, which is granted.
Whitestorm's mate was Willowpelt. With Willowpelt he fathered Sorreltail, Sootfur and Rainwhisker. As such he was the grandfather of Sorreltail's kits, Cinderheart, Molekit, Honeyfern, Poppyfrost, Seedpaw,and Lilyheart. And is the great-grandfather of Molepaw and Cherrypaw (Poppyfrost's kits). Snowfur's parents were Stormtail and Moonflower making them his other set of grandparents. His aunts were Bluestar (Snowfur's sister), Sweetpaw and Rosetail, because their brother, Thistleclaw, was his father, making Poppydawn and Windflight, their parents, his paternal grandparents. He was mentored by Patchpelt, and later mentored Patchpelt's niece, Sandstorm, and later, Sandstorm's cousin Brightheart. He is great-nephew to Pinestar (Poppydawn's brother), and great-great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother).


==== Yellowfang ====
Yellowfang, a dark gray she-cat with bright orange eyes and a flat, broad face with two scars on her muzzle. She is ThunderClan's medicine cat for much of the duration of the original series. She was originally the medicine cat of ShadowClan, and formed a forbidden relationship with ShadowClan's leader, Raggedstar (as medicine cats are not supposed to have mates), which resulted in her giving birth to three kits. Two of these kits died, and the third, Brokentail, lived and eventually forced his way into becoming ShadowClan's leader by killing his father, Raggedstar. Yellowfang believed that the consequences of her actions weren't that her other two kits died, but that Brokenstar survived to take over ShadowClan. Yellowfang was exiled from the camp when Brokenstar, who had never known who his true mother was, blamed her for the death of two kits he had forced into training too early. Yellowfang was found by Firepaw, who took her back to camp as a prisoner. After Spottedleaf's death, Yellowfang succeeded her as ThunderClan's new medicine cat. Later Yellowfang feeds deathberries to Brokenstar, after his capture by ThunderClan, killing him.
Yellowfang displays a rough and irritable personality to most cats who encounter her, especially Cinderpelt and Fireheart. She speaks the blunt truth rather often, refusing to soften her words, as she feels this would dilute the truth of the matter. Yellowfang has a close friendship with Firepaw beyond their initial meeting, during which the two attack each other. She is struck by Firepaw's potential and acts as a surrogate mother to him throughout his training. When Cinderpelt is injured and her chances of becoming a warrior forfeited, Yellowfang trains her as a medicine cat. Her personality clashes with that of Cinderpelt's, and the two often bicker playfully back and forth; Yellowfang greatly respects Cinderpelt as a result due to her courage to fire her words right back at her.
Yellowfang dies from smoke inhalation in the great fire that destroys much of ThunderClan's camp during the events of Rising Storm. Her last words are to Fireheart, telling him that he was the son she always wished she had. Yellowfang mentored Runningnose as a medicine cat in ShadowClan, who retained a great deal of respect for her despite her exile. She then mentored Cinderpelt in ThunderClan.
In the Power of Three series, Yellowfang is one of the first StarClan cats to realize Jaypaw's ability to transcend dreams. She attempts to stop him from abusing his power, but Jaypaw stubbornly refuses. She also argues with Bluestar and other members of StarClan regarding the prophecy concerning Jaypaw and his siblings, saying that the cats of StarClan are intentionally deceiving the three for an as yet undisclosed reason, however most likely referring to the fact that Leafpool is their mother. She also gave the crow's feather to Jayfeather in Sunrise to figure out who his father was. She appears in "The Forgotten Warrior" to tell Jayfeather that Cinderheart needs to know who she really is.
In The Last Hope, Yellowfang kills Brokenstar a second time.


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The New Prophecy series covers events in the story from Midnight to Sunset. Many characters here were first mentioned in the original series, but had minor or insignificant roles. In addition, as with the original series, most characters listed here play minor or significant roles in the following series, Power of Three, as well. The series circles around Tigerstar's and Firestar's children as the Clans have to find a new home, thanks to the twolegs who are destroying it.


==== Ashfur ====
Ashfur, a pale gray tom with darker flecks and dark blue eyes, was a ThunderClan warrior who was introduced in the original series as Ashkit and later Ashpaw along with his sister, Fernpaw. During the original series, he and Fernpaw willingly served as bait for the pack of dogs threatening ThunderClan's camp and ran ahead of them in order to lead them off course, because they lost their mother, Brindleface, to the dogs. In Into the Wild, there is a ShadowClan elder named Ashfur. He died in Rising Storm, but since ThunderClan's Ashfur was still Ashpaw at the time, there was no colliding of names. Ashfur is shown to be deeply committed to the warrior code, and, like other warriors such as his brother-in-law Dustpelt and his cousin Thornclaw, has concerns about the increasing amount of half-Clan and rogue cats that have been allowed to join ThunderClan. During the events of The New Prophecy, he falls in love with Squirrelflight, and attempts to get closer to her while she struggles with Brambleclaw. He is dismayed when Squirrelflight eventually tells him she was in love with Brambleclaw instead of him. Ashfur's resentment of Brambleclaw is also subconsciously motivated; he has never been able to forgive Brambleclaw for his father Tigerstar's actions, mainly his killing of Brindleface, Ashfur's mother. In the Power of Three series, Ashfur starts to go insane. For example, during a sparring match between him and his apprentice, Lionpaw, Brambleclaw's son, he turns ferociously hostile. However, it is revealed in Long Shadows that he has never been angry with Brambleclaw, just Squirrelflight. It was he who helped Hawkfrost and Tigerstar to try and kill Firestar in Sunset to "show [Squirrelflight] what pain really was" since he wanted Squirrelflight to suffer the pain of losing her father in retaliation for her choosing Brambleclaw over him. He tries to do this again by attempting to kill Lionblaze, Jayfeather, and Hollyleaf in the forest fire in Long Shadows, but he released them when Squirrelflight reveals they aren't her kits, so hurting her in that way would not work. He vows to tell all of the cats at the upcoming Gathering, which he claims will destroy Squirrelflight, in that she will lose Lionblaze, Jayfeather and Hollyleaf. Brambleclaw will want nothing to do with her, and no cat in any Clan would respect her. At the end of Long Shadows, before he gets the chance, he is mysteriously killed and his body was found floating in the stream of WindClan territory, while Squirrelflight happened to be away from the camp. Most of the cats of ThunderClan suspect it was a WindClan patrol, but it seemed to be implied that Squirrelflight killed him. The fact that Firestar did not mention the death of Ashfur at the Gathering might have been significant. Many people felt that Squirrelflight did not kill Ashfur, and the authors were instead trying to surprise the readers. Another suspected killer among fans was Sol (though he seemed not to have a motive). In Sunrise, his killer was revealed to be Hollyleaf, rather than Squirrelflight. Ashfur's mentor was Dustpelt. He has mentored Lionblaze as well as his nephew Birchfall. His mother is Brindleface. Brindleface was killed by Tigerstar in A Dangerous Path. He had a sister, Ferncloud, and as such is the uncle of Ferncloud's kits including Larchkit, Hollykit, Icecloud, Foxleap, Shrewpaw, Spiderleg, and Birchfall. He is also the foster brother of Cloudtail, due to his mother Brindleface's serving as Cloudtail's surrogate mother in the Clan. His aunt was Frostfur, making him cousin to Brackenfur, Brightheart, Cinderpelt and Thornclaw. In Omen of the Stars, it is revealed that he was allowed to join StarClan instead of being sent to the Dark Forest.


==== Bramblestar ====
 Bramblestar, first introduced as Bramblekit, and later known as Brambleclaw, is a muscular dark brown tabby tom with amber eyes. In A Dangerous Path he becomes Firestar's apprentice and is known as Bramblepaw for the remainder of the original series. He receives his warrior name, Brambleclaw, in the beginning of Firestar's Quest.
Bramblestar is the current ThunderClan leader, but he is often questioned about his loyalties because of his father, Tigerstar. He receives a message from the dead Bluestar, where she tells him that he must travel with cats from each Clan to go to the sun-drown place. That leads him to be traveling with his sister Tawnypelt, Crowfeather, Feathertail, and her brother Stormfur, and Firestar's daughter Squirrelflight. The cats journey to the sun-drown-place to find the badger, Midnight, who tells them that the Clans must find a new home. Brambleclaw seems to take a leadership role on their journey.
Brambleclaw and the others help to find the Clans a new home around the lake. Once the four Clans had settled in their new homes, Tigerstar began to walk in the dreams of Brambleclaw and Brambleclaw's half-brother, Hawkfrost, both Tigerstar's kin. Tigerstar's goal was to make his two sons ambitious for power, like he was when he was alive. However, he believes that Brambleclaw is too weak to take power by himself, so he plots with his evil son, Hawkfrost, to create a trap for Firestar. Hawkfrost shares his plot with Ashfur, who agrees to help, wanting to cause terrible grief for Squirrelflight because she chose Brambleclaw instead of him. Under the false assumption that Blackstar was waiting at the border, Firestar falls victim to a fox trap. Hawkfrost reveals that he was the one who led Firestar there, hoping Bramblestar would kill Firestar, and planning to kill Brambleclaw if he refused. However, Brambleclaw kills Hawkfrost and frees Firestar. Brambleclaw is later named deputy of ThunderClan after Leafpool has a vision of thorn-sharp brambles encircling the camp.
In Sunset, Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight, who had been quarreling before, realize how important they truly are to each other and become mates, angering Ashfur. They have three kits, Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, and Lionblaze  however, in Long Shadows, Squirrelflight admits that Brambleclaw is not the father of her kits, and she never even had kits in the first place. Brambleclaw himself is unaware of this, according to Squirrelflight, until the end of Sunrise. He becomes angry with Squirrelflight about this. In The Fourth Apprentice, it's revealed that they are not mates anymore due to this.
In The Last Hope, Brambleclaw succeeds Firestar as leader of ThunderClan, and appoints Squirrelflight his deputy having forgiven her for her deception.
Brambleclaw has mentored Berrynose. Brambleclaw's siblings include Tawnypelt and four half siblings: Hawkfrost, Mothwing, Tadpole and Swiftpaw. He is uncle to Tawnypelt's kits, including Tigerheart, Dawnpelt, and Flametail.
Brambleclaw's parents are Goldenflower and Tigerstar, and it is revealed in Code of the Clans that Brambleclaw's grandparents are Pinestar and Leopardfoot. He is great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother), Adderfang and Swiftbreeze (Leopardfoot's parents); his both great-grandmothers being SkyClan's direct descendants (Cloudstar, Birdflight, Gorseclaw and Spottedpelt), Brambleclaw is himself part-SkyClan. He is also nephew to Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters), Lionheart and Snowkit (Goldenflower's brothers), and great-nephew to Patchpelt, Willowpelt, Redtail and Spottedleaf (Leopardfoot's siblings).


==== Squirrelflight ====
Squirrelflight, a dark ginger she-cat with green eyes, is the daughter of Firestar and Sandstorm, as well as the littermate of Leafpool. She and Leafpool share a special telepathic connection, in which one can always know what the other is thinking or feeling. She and Leafpool are first introduced as kits, Squirrelkit and Leafkit, in the epilogue of Firestar's Quest. In The New Prophecy, Squirrelflight joins the prophesied cats to find Midnight at the sun-drown place, the prophesied cats being Crowpaw, Feathertail, Brambleclaw and his sister Tawnypelt. Stormfur tags along as well so he can be with Feathertail, his sister. Squirrelflight is shown to be arrogant with a temper as an apprentice, but gradually matures during The New Prophecy series.
At first, she taunted and resented Brambleclaw, but later fell in love with him during their journey, similar to what happened with her parents, Firestar and Sandstorm. However, when Brambleclaw warms up to his half-brother and RiverClan warrior, Hawkfrost, he begins to lose Squirrelflight's trust, believing that Hawkfrost is as murderously ambitious as his father, Tigerstar, and that Brambleclaw will follow in his ambitions. During this time, Squirrelflight began to get closer to Ashfur. During the badger attack in ThunderClan camp that kills Cinderpelt, Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw realize how much they really mean to each other, and Squirrelflight leaves Ashfur to be with Brambleclaw. She tries to remain friends with Ashfur, but he rejects her friendship, feeling betrayed.
In the Power of Three series, Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw apparently have three kits; Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, and Lionblaze. Ashfur seems to have gotten over Squirrelflight, however he behaves rather strangely. In Long Shadows, Ashfur admits that he was the one who helped Hawkfrost try to kill Firestar in Sunset, in an attempt to hurt Squirrelflight emotionally. He then tries to kill her three kits in a forest fire, but Squirrelflight reveals that they aren't hers, so it would not hurt her that way. At the end of Long Shadows, Ashfur is found mysteriously killed by WindClan territory, Squirrelflight being a major suspect, but it is revealed in Sunrise that actually Hollyleaf killed Ashfur, trying to keep him quiet, as he was planning to tell the secret that Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw weren't her parents at a Gathering. Brambleclaw is furious that Squirrelflight lied to him about Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, and Jayfeather, and in Omen of the Stars, they are not mates anymore. At the end of The Last Hope he finally forgives her.
When her father dies and Brambleclaw becomes leader, she becomes his deputy. In the manga at the end of Bramblestar's Storm, it is revealed that she is not barren, as indicated earlier by Yellowfang, as she is expecting Bramblestar's kits. In The Apprentice's Quest, she has kits Alderpaw and Sparkpaw. Alderpaw looks like his father Bramblestar and Sparkpaw looks like her grandfather Firestar.
Squirrelflight was mentored by Dustpelt and has mentored Foxleap and Rosepetal. She keeps a secret from the Clan with Leafpool.


==== Leafpool ====
Leafpool, a slender light brown tabby she-cat with white paws and amber eyes, is the medicine cat of ThunderClan. She is the daughter of Firestar and Sandstorm, and the sister of Squirrelflight, with whom she shares a unique telepathic connection, in which each can always know what the other is feeling. She is mentioned as a kit, Leafkit, named for Leafstar and Spottedleaf, in the epilogue of Firestar's Quest, and later as a medicine cat apprentice, Leafpaw, in Midnight, mentored by her mother's (Sandstorm) cousin Cinderpelt. She makes the Great Journey along with the four Clans in Dawn and discovers the Moonpool in Starlight, the Moonstone equivalent in their new territory. Because of this, Cinderpelt gives Leafpaw her full medicine cat name, Leafpool. Leafpool also receives a frightening prophecy from StarClan: Before there is peace, blood will spill blood, and the lake will run red.
This prophecy meant Brambleclaw killing Hawkfrost to save Firestar, Leafpool's father. When Leafpool arrives a little after Hawkfrost dies, not going to StarClan but to the Dark Forest seeing that he is just as evil as Tigerstar, she believes that Brambleclaw is a traitor, but when she sees that the blood on his pads weren't her father's but Hawkfrost's, she understood the prophecy at last. Brambleclaw and Hawkfrost were kin; Blood had indeed spilled blood. Brambleclaw had killed his half brother to save Firestar. She had been right about Hawkfrost  he was too ambitious, too much like his father, Tigerstar-but she has never imagined that Brambleclaw would be the cat to stop him.
Leafpool starts to develop feelings for Crowfeather, though they are from different Clans and Leafpool is not allowed to take a mate, being a medicine cat. After Cinderpelt finds out that she has been meeting Crowfeather, they attempt to run away to be able to be together in Twilight. However, when Midnight the badger arrives to warn the Clans of a badger attack, Crowfeather and Leafpool realize how much their Clans mean to them, and they decide to return. Unfortunately, Leafpool arrives too late to save Cinderpelt when the horde of badgers attack the ThunderClan camp, and continually expresses guilt because of her mentor's death throughout the rest of the series. She and Crowfeather agree never to see each other again, though for the rest of the books they are both oddly tense whenever they meet on occasion. Leafpool becomes the new ThunderClan medicine cat in Sunset, and discovers that Brambleclaw is to be the new deputy in Graystripe's absence and that he and Squirrelflight are destined to be mates, as well as the fact that her mentor, Cinderpelt, has been reincarnated as one of Sorreltail's kits, Cinderheart. Spottedleaf also reveals to her that Mothwing, the RiverClan medicine cat and Leafpool's friend, does not believe in StarClan, a result of Hawkfrost, her brother, tricking Mudfur into taking her as his apprentice and then openly sharing with her what truly happened. Leafpool is also featured in a play written by Victoria Holmes, titled After Sunset: We Need to Talk, in which she appears to have something to tell Crowfeather, but then denies it after Crowfeather confesses that he has taken a new mate, Nightcloud, in WindClan.
Later, in The Sight, she takes Hollypaw as her apprentice, who later decides to quit and become a warrior instead, confessing that she only wanted to be a medicine cat because of the position it would give her. Then, Jaypaw, Hollypaw's brother, receives a message from StarClan telling him that he must become a medicine cat, and becomes Leafpool's new apprentice. Leafpool gives him his full medicine cat name Jayfeather, in Long Shadows.
In "Sunrise" it is revealed Leafpool is Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze's mother. Crowfeather is their father as well. Hollyleaf tells the truth at the Gathering and Crowfeather says that Leafpool, Jayfeather, Lionblaze and Hollyleaf mean nothing to him. Leafpool tells the Clan that she can not be a medicine cat anymore. Afterwards, Hollyleaf tries to kill her by forcing her to eat deathberries in the ThunderClan camp. Leafpool asks Hollyleaf what would be worse: if she stayed alive, disowned by Crowfeather, living without the love of her own kits, and no longer a medicine cat, or died; Hollyleaf stops forcing her and Leafpool walks out of the medicine cat's den.
In Omen of the Stars, she becomes a warrior because she revealed that she had kits; however, Jayfeather views her as being incompetent as a warrior and is still furious about her lying. Lionblaze, however, seems to have forgiven her and respects and loves her as his mother. Hollyleaf views her like Jayfeather, furious about her lying.
She is also niece to Princess (Firestar's sister), half-niece to Scourge, Ruby and Socks (Firestar's half-siblings), Ashfur and Ferncloud (Sandstorm's half-brother and half-sister), cousin to Cloudtail (Princess' son), granddaughter to Redtail and Brindleface (Sandstorm's parents), Jake and Nutmeg (Firestar's parents), great-niece to Willowpelt, Spottedleaf, Patchpelt and Leopardfoot (Redtail's brother and sisters), Dustpelt, Longtail, Ravenpaw and Frostfur (Brindleface's brothers and sister), and great-granddaughter to Adderfang and Swiftbreeze (Redtail's parents), and Fuzzypelt and Robinwing (Brindleface's parents).
In Omen of the Stars: Night Whispers, Breezepelt, Crowfeather's son, gets into a fight with a ThunderClan patrol. Crowfeather and Nightcloud are with him, and Leafpool gets into a fight with Crowfeather, telling him that she only left him because their Clans needed them. Nightcloud gets mad at Crowfeather.
In The Last Hope, after the battle, Jayfeather asks Leafpool to assist him.
In Bramblestar's Storm, she is listed as a medicine cat along with Jayfeather.


==== Daisy ====
Daisy is a cream-colored long-furred she-cat who lived at the horseplace with two other cats named Smoky and Floss. She was afraid that the twolegs (or 'Nofurs', as she initially referred to them as) at horseplace were going to take away her kits fathered by Smoky (originally named Berry, Mouse, and Hazel) because they had taken away Floss's litter, so she brought them to ThunderClan to keep them safe. Cloudtail volunteers to help teach her battle moves, and she develops feelings for him over time. She doesn't seem to enjoy training and constantly complains about the safety of her kits. She decides to go back to the horseplace following the badger attack in Twilight, worried that Clan life is too dangerous for her kits, but is persuaded to return to ThunderClan by her kits, Berrykit, Mousekit and Hazelkit along with Brambleclaw and Cloudtail. It is also revealed that another reason that she left is because she realizes that Cloudtail will never return her feelings for him after she sees the way he loves Brightheart, his mate. Her kits trained as ThunderClan warriors and received their warrior names, Berrynose, Mousewhisker, and Hazeltail, in Outcast. Daisy's first litter was fathered by Smoky, but her recent mate is Spiderleg, with whom she has two kits; Rosekit and Toadkit. In Long Shadows, it is revealed that Spiderleg and Daisy are no longer mates, and that Spiderleg "never really wanted kits in the first place." Daisy is a permanent member of ThunderClan, but she is not a warrior; she remains in the nursery throughout the series to help the queens. In Fading Echoes, she becomes grandmother to Cherrykit and Molekit (Berrynose and Poppyfrost's kits).


==== Ferncloud ====
Ferncloud is a pale gray she-cat with darker flecks and pale green eyes. She is mentored by Darkstripe (and Longtail, after Darkstripe is exiled from ThunderClan) as an apprentice, Fernpaw, during the original series. In A Dangerous Path she helps to lure the dog pack away from the ThunderClan camp along with her brother, Ashpaw, to avenge the death of their mother, Brindleface. She is the mate of Dustpelt, and mother of three litters: first litter: Spiderleg and Shrewpaw; second litter: Hollykit, Larchkit, and Birchfall; third litter: Foxleap and Icecloud. Unfortunately, Hollykit and Larchkit die from starvation, while Shrewpaw dies when he is run over by a monster while hunting a pheasant in Dawn. Ferncloud is depicted as a gentle, motherly cat who remains in the nursery, where she is suited best. She helps to look after new kits with Daisy. Like Daisy and Goldenflower she usually doesn't leave the nursery but cares for kits. Ferncloud is also niece to Frostfur, Dustpelt and Ravenpaw, granddaughter to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Brindleface's parents) and Adderfang and Swiftbreeze (Redtail's parents), cousin to Cinderpelt, Brackenfur, Thornclaw and Brightheart (Frostfur's kits), grandcousin to Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter), Honeyfern, Molepaw, Poppyfrost and Cinderheart (Brackenfur's kits), great-grandcousin to Cherrykit and Molekit (Poppyfrost's kits) Dovewing and Ivypool (Whitewing's daughters), recently grandmother to Rosepetal and Toadstep (Spiderleg's kits), half-aunt to Squirrelflight and Leafpool (Sandstorm's daughters) and great-half-aunt to Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze (Leafpool's kits).
Ferncloud is killed by Brokenstar during the Great Battle.


==== Rainwhisker ====
A dark gray tom with blue eyes, Rainwhisker is a ThunderClan warrior first introduced in The Darkest Hour as a kit, Rainkit. He is the brother of Sorreltail and Sootfur and the son of Willowpelt and Whitestorm. He is later an apprentice, Rainpaw, mentored by Cloudtail, in Firestar's Quest. As an apprentice, he was often sent to assist Cinderpelt. He becomes a warrior sometime between Firestar's Quest and Midnight. It is revealed in that he was killed by a falling tree branch during a storm between Sunset and The Sight. He is uncle of Sorreltail's kits, including Poppyfrost, Honeyfern (deceased) Cinderheart, and Molepaw (deceased). Rainwhisker is also nephew to Patchpelt, Leopardfoot, Spottedleaf and Redtail (Willowpelt's siblings), grandson to Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Willowpelt's parents) and Snowfur and Thistleclaw (Whitestorm's parents), grandnephew to Rosetail, Sweetpaw (Thistleclaw's siblings) and Bluestar (Snowfur's sister), great-grandson to Windflight and Poppydawn (Thistleclaw's parents) and Moonflower and Stormtail (Snowfur's parents), great-grandnephew to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother) and Pinestar (Poppydawn's brother), great-great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Poppydawn's mother), cousin to Tigerstar, Mistkit and Nightkit (Leopardfoot's kits), Sandstorm (Redtail's daughter) and Longtail and Graystripe (Patchpelt's kits), grandcousin to Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Tadpole, Mothwing and Hawkfrost (Tigerstar's kits), Squirrelflight and Leafpool (Sandstorm's kits) and Feathertail, Stormfur, Briarlight, Bumblestripe, and Blossomfall (Graystripe's kits) and great-grandcousin to Dawnpelt, Tigerheart and Flametail (Tawnypelt's kits), Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Hollyleaf (Leafpool's kits) Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine) (Stormfur's kits) and kin to Mistyfoot, Stonefur, Mosskit (Bluestar's kits), Graymist, Reedwhisker (Mistyfoot's kits), Mallownose and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits).


==== Spiderleg ====
Spiderleg is a long-limbed black tom with a brown underbelly and amber eyes, is briefly seen in Firestar's Quest as a kit, Spiderkit. He is the son of Ferncloud and Dustpelt, and his siblings include Birchfall, Icecloud, Foxleap, Hollykit, Larchkit, and Shrewpaw, the later three being deceased. His mentor was Cloudtail, and he temporarily mentored Dawnpaw of ShadowClan when Tawnypelt and her kits briefly left ShadowClan for ThunderClan in Long Shadows. Spiderleg's former mate was Daisy and they had two kits, Rosekit and Toadkit. In Long Shadows, it is revealed that Spiderleg no longer loves Daisy and that he "never really wanted kits." Spiderleg is overall a loyal warrior, but shares his sharp tongue with his father, Dustpelt, and is often one of the key characters to protest against something unusual. He shares the belief with Dustpelt, Thornclaw, and Ashfur that there are too many non-Clanborn cats in ThunderClan. He is one of the few completely "forest-blooded" cats left in ThunderClan. He is not one of the main characters, and often flits in and out of scenes in the books since his first real introduction as an apprentice, Spiderpaw, in Midnight. Spiderleg's also nephew to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), grandson to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-grandson to Fuzzypelt and Robinwing (Brindleface's parents), great-nephew to Frostfur (Brindleface's sister), Longtail, Dustpelt and Ravenpaw (Brindleface's brothers), uncle to Dovepaw and Ivypaw (Birchfall's daughters) and kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brightheart, Brackenfur (Frostfur's kits), Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart and Molepaw (Brackenfur's kits)


==== Sootfur ====
Sootfur, a light gray tom with amber eyes, is a ThunderClan warrior first introduced in The Darkest Hour, the brother of Sorreltail and Rainwhisker and the son of Willowpelt and Whitestorm. He was seen as an apprentice, Sootpaw, in Firestar's Quest. During the events of the book, his mother Willowpelt dies saving him from a badger. Sootpaw is made a warrior, Sootfur, sometime between the events of Firestar's Quest and Midnight. Sootfur appears to be hotheaded and sometimes says somewhat rude things such as when he remarks that Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw may have made the right decision getting out of the forest when they did and when he remarks that Daisy would be too fat and lazy to run fast enough to catch mice. In the fifth book of The New Prophecy series, Twilight, Sootfur is killed during the attack of the badgers invading ThunderClan camp.
Sootfur's mentor was originally Longtail, but after Longtail was blinded by a rabbit in Firestar's Quest, his mentor was changed to Thornclaw. He is uncle of Sorreltail's kits, including Poppyfrost, Honeyfern,(deceased) Cinderheart, and Molepaw (deceased). Sootfur's also nephew to Patchpelt, Lepardfoot, Spottedleaf and Redtail (Willowpelt's siblings), grandson to Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Willowpelt's parents) and Snowfur and Thistleclaw (Whitestorm's parents), grandnephew to Rosetail, Sweetpaw (Thistleclaw's siblings) and Bluestar (Snowfur's sister), great-grandson to Windflight and Poppydawn (Thistleclaw's parents) and Moonflower and Stormtail (Snowfur's parents), great-grandnephew to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), cousin to Tigerstar, Mistkit and Nightkit (Leopardfoot's kits), Sandstorm (Redtail's daughter), grandcousin to Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Tadpole, Mothwing and Hawkfrost (Tigerstar's kits) and kin to Mistyfoot, Stonefur, Mosskit (Bluestar's kits), and Reedwhisker (Mistyfoot's kit).


==== Sorreltail ====
Sorreltail, a tortoiseshell and white she-cat with amber eyes, is a ThunderClan warrior, the only daughter of Willowpelt and Whitestorm and the sister of Sootfur and Rainwhisker. Introduced in The Darkest Hour as Sorrelkit, an adventurous young kit, she followed her half-brother Darkstripe and caught him speaking to Blackfoot, the ShadowClan deputy, on ThunderClan territory during the events of the book. She was seen by Darkstripe, who then tricked her into eating deathberries to keep her quiet about his treachery. After recovering, she told Firestar what Darkstripe did to her, bringing about his exile from ThunderClan.
She is an apprentice, Sorrelpaw, in Firestar's Quest, mentored by her cousin Sandstorm, although due to Sandstorm's being away from ThunderClan on the journey to find SkyClan during the events of the book, Sorrelpaw is temporarily mentored by Dustpelt. In between Firestar's Quest and Midnight, Sorrelpaw is struck by a monster (car), injuring her shoulder. Sorrelpaw eventually recovers under Cinderpelt's care, but has to train for longer than that of a usual apprentice. In Midnight, Sorrelpaw finally receives her warrior name, Sorreltail, and becomes best friends with Leafpool. Whenever Leafpool needs to go out, she always asks Sorreltail to go with her. When the four Clans reach their new lake home, Sorreltail falls in love with Brackenfur and they became mates. Sorreltail gives birth to her kits in Twilight during an unexpected badger attack, but was saved by Cinderpelt, who died trying to defend Sorreltail and her kits. In the end, she gives birth to four kits, Molepaw (dead), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern (dead), and Cinderheart, named in honor of Cinderpelt, which is ironic because Cinderheart is the reincarnated form of Cinderpelt even though Cinderheart doesn't know it herself. Later in The Forgotten Warrior, Sorreltail and Brackenfur announce that she is carrying kits again, and in the ending chapter of the book, Sorreltail gives birth to two kits, which she names Seedkit and Lilykit. Sorreltail's also niece to Patchpelt, Leopardfoot, Spottedleaf and Redtail (Willowpelt's siblings), granddaughter to Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Willowpelt's parents) and Snowfur and Thistleclaw (Whitestorm's parents), grandniece to Rosetail, Sweetpaw (Thistleclaw's siblings) and Bluestar (Snowfur's sister), great-granddaughter to Windflight and Poppydawn (Thistleclaw's parents) and Moonflower and Stormtail (Snowfur's parents), great-great-niece to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), and Pinestar (Poppydawn's brother), cousin to Tigerstar, Mistkit and Nightkit (Leopardfoot's kits), Longtail (Patchpelt's son), and Sandstorm (Redtail's daughter), second cousin to Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Tadpole, Mothwing and Hawkfrost (Tigerstar's kits), Squirrelflight and Leafpool (Sandstorm's daughters), and kin to Mistyfoot, Stonefur, Mosskit (Bluestar's kits), Graymist, Reedwhisker (Mistyfoot's kits), Mallownose and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits), and Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze (Leafpool's kits). She is half-sister to Graystripe, making her aunt to Stormfur, Feathertail, Briarlight, Blossomfall, Bumblestripe.
In Bramblestar's Storm, it is revealed that she hid her wounds from Jayfeather to care for her kits but her wounds ended up killing her.


=== Power of Three Series ===
The Power of Three series covers events in the story from The Sight to present, which currently encompasses the events of Sunrise. The series is centered on the apparent children of Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight, Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, and Jayfeather, and the prophecy that was made about them.


==== Berrynose ====
Berrynose is a cream-colored tom, the son of Daisy and Smoky, the littermate of Mousewhisker and Hazeltail, and the half-brother of Rosekit and Toadkit. He is first introduced as a very young kit named Berry in Twilight. His mother, Daisy, takes him and his littermates away from the horseplace where they were born so the Twolegs inhabiting it would not take them away. After a ThunderClan patrol finds them, they join ThunderClan and Berry is given the Clan name of Berrykit. He is the most adventurous of his littermates, and he accidentally ventures into a fox trap while sneaking out of camp in Sunset and loses half of his tail. This event causes him to be paranoid about his warrior name, afraid Firestar would give him a ridiculous name, such as 'Berrystumpytail'. He is first introduced as an apprentice, Berrypaw, in The Sight, mentored by Brambleclaw. He is shown to be an arrogant and disrespectful cat similar to Darkstripe, especially after he is made a warrior in Outcast. He criticizes even the littlest mistakes made by apprentices and refuses to listen to any criticism directed at him. It is revealed that Honeyfern has a crush on him. In Sunrise the two are seen getting along well and are assumed to be in love considering they were suggesting that they would have kits together. He is grief-stricken when she dies from a snake bite. In the Omen of the Stars series, Berrynose is the father of Cherrykit and Molekit by Poppyfrost, Honeyfern's sister. Poppyfrost is extremely worried because she thinks Berrynose is still in love with Honeyfern, but it is revealed that Berrynose loves her as much, even more, and is just anxious to keep her safe.


==== Blossomfall ====
A tortoiseshell she-cat with white patches on her pelt. Blossomfall is the daughter of Graystripe and Millie and the littermate of Bumblestripe and Briarlight as well as the half-sister of Feathertail and Stormfur. She was first introduced in Eclipse, along with her littermates. Her mentor is Hazeltail. She also develops a crush on Toadstep. In Sign of the Moon, Ivypool discovers that Blossomfall is being trained in the Dark Forest. She becomes very jealous of Briarlight because Millie acts as if Briarlight is her only kit.


==== Birchfall ====
A light brown tabby tom, Birchfall is Birchkit and Birchpaw in the New Prophecy series, and is first seen as a warrior in The Sight. Birchfall is the son of Ferncloud and Dustpelt, and as such is the brother of Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Icecloud, Foxleap, Hollykit, and Larchkit, of which the later two are his littermates. During the destruction of the forest in The New Prophecy, his littermates, Hollykit and Larchkit, die of starvation, while his brother Shrewpaw dies when a tree cutter runs over him. As Birchkit, he makes the Great Journey across the mountains with the Clans to their new home, and becomes the first apprentice, Birchpaw, in ThunderClan's new camp. He was mentored by Ashfur. Birchfall's current mate, Whitewing, stayed an apprentice waiting for Birchfall to be able to get his warrior name with her. Birchfall's also nephew to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), and Sandstorm (Ferncloud's half-sister), grandson to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-grandson to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Brindleface's parents), grandnephew to Frostfur (Brindleface's sister), and kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brightheart, Brackenfur (Frostfur's kits), Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart and Molepaw (Brackenfur's kits). Birchfall fathered Dovewing and Ivypool with his mate, Whitewing. Birchfall was seen training in the Dark Forest.


==== Briarlight ====
A dark brown she-cat, Briarlight is the daughter of Graystripe and Millie and the littermate of Bumblestripe and Blossomfall, as well as the half-sister of Feathertail and Stormfur. She is first introduced in Eclipse, along with her littermates. She got sick with greencough when her mother, Millie, fell ill, but is in decent health by Sunrise. She is nearly bitten by a snake in Sunrise, but is saved by her cousin Honeyfern, who died. In The Fourth Apprentice she is mentored by Thornclaw. She becomes a warrior in Fading Echoes after being injured by a tree falling on her hind legs, permanently paralyzing them.
She feels very guilty, for not being able to hunt, or patrol for her Clan (due to her broken backbone). As a result, she won't eat anything Millie brings her. Jayfeather's solution is for Briarlight to help him in his den (cleaning up herbs, making moss balls, and checking moss for bits of wood,dirt, and thorns). She also finds a small scrap of Hollyleaf's fur in The Forgotten Warrior."


==== Bumblestripe ====
 A pale gray tom with dark black stripes, Bumblestripe is the son of Graystripe and Millie and the littermate of Blossomfall and Briarlight, as well as the half-brother of Feathertail and Stormfur. He is said to be the biggest kit in his litter and was named for the stripes on his back, making him look like a bumblebee. He was first introduced in Eclipse, along with his littermates. In The Fourth Apprentice he is mentored by Mousewhisker. It is hinted by Blossomfall that Bumblestripe is in love with Dovewing in Sign of the Moon. In The Forgotten Warrior, he is seen spending a lot of time with Dovewing and by the end of the book, he confesses to Dovewing that he wants to be more than friends.


==== Cinderheart ====
Cinderheart, a gray tabby she-cat with blue eyes, is a ThunderClan warrior first mentioned at the end of Twilight and formally introduced in The Sight. She is initially revealed to be the reincarnation of Cinderpelt, the former ThunderClan medicine cat. This fact becomes clear to Leafpool in Sunset when Spottedleaf tells her where to find Cinderpelt and shows her Cinderkit. Cinderheart is not consciously aware of her situation and is very much her own character, though her personality is similar to Cinderpelt's before she was injured; Jayfeather's attempts to walk in her dreams result in the personality of the original Cinderpelt revealing herself in the former ThunderClan camp in the forest, implying that Cinderpelt's spirit does indeed reside within Cinderheart's subconsciousness. Leafpool and Jayfeather are the only cats that are aware of Cinderheart's true identity; while Leafpool wants to keep it a secret from Cinderheart indefinitely, Jayfeather wants to reveal the truth to her, thus adding heat to the already obvious indifferences of these two cats (as of Night Whispers, Jayfeather has not revealed the truth to Cinderheart or anybody else).
She and Lionblaze seemed to become mates between Fading Echoes, and Night Whispers. She and Lionblaze seemed to be deeply in love, but Cinderheart breaks the relationship when Lionblaze tells her that he is part of the prophecy. She tells him that they can't be mates, and as a result, she breaks Lionblaze's heart. In The Forgotten Warrior, Jayfeather convinces her that she and Lionblaze can become mates.
Cinderheart is StarClan's answer to Cinderpelt's dreams of becoming a warrior. She becomes an apprentice under Cloudtail along with Jayfeather, Lionblaze and Hollyleaf, her best friend, and others. In an ironic twist of fate, however, she falls from a tree branch in Dark River and injures her leg, in fact the same leg that Cinderpelt injured. She is able to recover partially, but reinjures it during her assessment in Eclipse and is thrown into a state of depression (Cinderpaw's desire to become a warrior is as strong as Cinderpelt's, although it is unknown whether Cinderpelt herself influenced this personality). Jayfeather teaches her to swim in order to stretch and build the muscles without straining them, and by the end of Eclipse, Cinderpaw is able to walk and run normally and receives her warrior name. Cinderpelt's original destiny having been fulfilled, it is unknown whether or not Cinderheart's reincarnation will contribute to future events.
At the end of Eclipse, when she is given her warrior name, Firestar names her Cinderheart "...in honor of those warriors who have gone before." It is unclear whether Firestar is referencing Cinderpelt or not. Though Cinderheart is a reincarnation of Cinderpelt, in this new life she is the daughter of Sorreltail and Brackenfur and the sister of Molepaw, who died from a sickness that didn't react to Leafpool's herbs. Poppyfrost and Honeyfern are also her siblings. Brackenfur and Cinderpelt are siblings so Cinderpelt and her reincarnation are actually related, Cinderheart being her niece. During Sunrise, Honeyfern dies, and Cinderheart is grief-stricken. She tells Hollyleaf she shouldn't have said anything at the Gathering. In "Omen of the Stars", Cinderheart is Ivypaw's mentor. It is interesting that Cinderheart and Cinderpelt both fell in love with similar tom cats, since Lionblaze is Firestar's kin, that might also be part of Cinderheart's destiny.
In The Last Hope, she still cannot decide whether to stay a warrior or be a medicine cat as in her past life. Lionblaze confronts her and tells her that she has a destiny, but she can choose. When she chooses to be a warrior and chooses to be Lionblaze's mate, Cinderpelt's spirit comes out of her body and mouths "Thank you" to Lionblaze before she goes to StarClan.
In Bramblestar's Storm, she has three kits with Lionblaze: Hollykit, Fernkit, and Sorrelkit, later Hollytuft, Fernsong, and Sorrelstripe.


==== Foxleap ====
A reddish tabby tom, Foxleap was first introduced as a kit, Foxkit, in The Sight. He is the son of Ferncloud and Dustpelt and the littermate of Icecloud as well as the brother of Shrewpaw, Hollykit, Larchkit, Spiderleg, and Birchfall. He becomes an apprentice, Foxpaw, in Outcast, and is mentored by his cousin Squirrelflight, but due to Squirrelflight's temporary departure to the Tribe of Rushing Water during the book, he is mentored by his aunt Sandstorm's cousin Sorreltail for a while. His aunt Sandstorm also takes over as his mentor for Squirrelflight when she becomes ill in Long Shadows. It is said that he wishes his warrior name to be Foxcatcher. Foxleap is nephew to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother) grandson to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brackenfur, Brightheart (Frostfur's kits), Honeyfern, Poppyfrost, Molepaw, Cinderheart (Brackenfur's kits) and Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter). He's also uncle to Dovewing, Ivypool (Birchfall's daughters), Rosepetal and Toadstep (Spiderleg's kits).
In Bramblestar's Storm, Foxleap is said to have died of his wounds shortly after the great battle. This is confirmed in Dovewing's Silence.


==== Hazeltail ====
Hazeltail is a small gray-and-white she-cat, the daughter of Daisy and Smoky, the littermate of Berrynose and Mousewhisker, and the half-sister of Rosepetal and Toadstep. She is first introduced as a kit named Hazel in Twilight, when her mother Daisy took her and her littermates away from the horseplace where they were born so the Twolegs there would not take them away. After a ThunderClan patrol found them, they joined ThunderClan and Hazel was given the Clan name of Hazelkit. In Sunset, Spottedleaf visits the nursery and shows her and Mousewhisker (then Mousekit) a butterfly, which she says they can catch, leading Leafpool to discover the truth about the RiverClan medicine cat, Mothwing. She was introduced as an apprentice, Hazelpaw, in The Sight, mentored by Dustpelt, and continues this apprenticeship until she becomes a warrior, Hazeltail, in Outcast, along with her littermates. In Sunrise, she meets her father, Smoky, and Floss for the first time. Smoky appears proud of her and Floss is concerned when she mentions that Berrynose lost half his tail in a fox trap. She was the mentor of Blossomfall.
In Bramblestar's Storm, she is said to be killed by greencough.


==== Hollyleaf ====
Hollyleaf, a black she-cat with green eyes, is a ThunderClan kit, apprentice and warrior introduced in The Sight. She is one of the protagonists of the Power of Three series with her ThunderClan brothers Jayfeather and Lionblaze, and is on the cover of Sunrise. Initially, Hollyleaf chooses to become a medicine cat as a result of the respect she sees other cats giving Leafpool, the current medicine cat, and wants to be considered extremely important to her Clan. She abandons this choice after a short time, as she cannot remember herbs very well and gets easily disgusted when dealing with wounds and injuries. She develops an affinity for battle training and realizes that she would best serve her Clan as a warrior, and begins training under Brackenfur. Hollyleaf learned under her mentor to be incredibly loyal and devoted to follow the warrior code. As a result, Hollyleaf highly disapproved of her brother Lionblaze's affinity for Heathertail, a WindClan she-cat.
Hollyleaf is considered the most cunning and bound to the warrior code of the three siblings, prone to thinking out strategies carefully rather than rushing in blindly. She is not one of the Three in the prophecy, even though both of her brothers are. As a result, she has no power. She is devoted to the warrior code and considers it to be the foundation of Clan life, and is terrified to think of a Clan operating without it. She has aspirations about becoming Clan leader, a function that she feels would best serve her Clan. Her ideologies differ from her brothers in this respect, in that she is always trying to think of what would benefit all cats and not just herself. Hollyleaf seems deeply burdened by responsibility upon learning of the prophecy concerning herself and her siblings. It was revealed in Long Shadows that Squirrelflight is not her mother. Her real parents are Leafpool and Crowfeather. In Long Shadows, Hollyleaf becomes so obsessed with the code, she scares Jayfeather at one point. At the end of the book, she kills Ashfur to stop him from telling the clans that Squirrelflight is not her mother. In Sunrise, she goes mad having been the daughter of a medicine cat and a WindClan warrior thus breaking the warrior code. Eventually, in a Gathering, she says to every cat that Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw weren't the parents of her and Lionblaze and Jayfeather, but it was Leafpool and Crowfeather. Then, she runs into a tunnel which collapses onto her, leading most cats to believe she is dead.
She also tries to kill Leafpool by trying to make her eat deathberries, but lets her go when Leafpool points out that it would be more painful for her to live on than die. Her extreme devotion to the warrior code eventually led to her downfall. While most thought that Hollyleaf was part of the Three, she truly was not. Rather, the three relates to Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Dovewing. She is proven alive in The Forgotten Warrior and she returns to ThunderClan.
She is killed by Dark Forest warrior Hawkfrost while helping defeat Hawkfrost with Ivypool, who brought Hollyleaf back to ThunderClan in The Last Hope and is seen walking out with the rest of the spirits of StarClan when they retrieve Firestar to go to StarClan.
She is great-granddaughter to Jake and Nutmeg (Firestar's parents), and Redtail and Brindleface (Sandstorm's parents), she is half-sister to Breezepelt (Nightcloud's and Crowfeather's son), granddaughter to Firestar and Sandstorm (Leafpool's parents) and Ashfoot, the WindClan deputy (and Crowfeather's mother), niece to Eaglekit (Crowfeather's brother) and Squirrelflight (Leafpool's sister), grandniece to Princess (Firestar's sister), half-grand-niece to Scourge, Ruby and Socks (Firestar's half-siblings) and kin to Cloudtail (Firestar's nephew), Whitewing (Cloudtail's daughter), Dovepaw and Ivypaw (Whitewing's daughters). As her father, Crowfeather, is a direct descendant to Windstar and Gorsestar (WindClan's first and second leaders), Hollyleaf is their descendant too. She's half-WindClan, 25% ThunderClan, 25% kittypet, and part SkyClan, because Spottedleaf is Sandstorm's aunt. As Spottedleaf is related directly to Birdflight's (Cloudstar's mate) kits, and Sandstorm is Hollyleaf's grandmother.


==== Honeyfern ====
Honeyfern is a light brown tabby she-cat with blue eyes and the daughter of Brackenfur and Sorreltail. She is sister to Cinderheart, Poppyfrost, and Molepaw. She was first introduced as a kit, Honeykit, near the end of Twilight, and as an apprentice, Honeypaw, in The Sight. She was mentored by Sandstorm, who also mentored her mother, Sorreltail. She continues her apprenticeship for the rest of the series until she receives her warrior name, Honeyfern, in Eclipse. It is revealed that she has a crush on Berrynose. In Sunrise Berrynose starts to return the affection. But soon after she dies of a snake bite while saving Briarkit, Lionblaze not being fast enough to kill the snake himself. In "The Fourth Apprentice", Honeyfern saves Jayfeather from Breezepelt when Breezepelt attacks the ThunderClan medicine cat at the Moonpool.


==== Icecloud ====
Icecloud is a white she-cat with bright blue eyes, first introduced as a kit, Icekit, in The Sight. She is the daughter of Ferncloud and Dustpelt and the littermate of Foxleap, as well as the younger sister of Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Birchfall, Hollykit (who died before the Great Journey) and Larchkit. Icepaw and Foxpaw shared dens with Lionblaze, Jayfeather, and Hollyleaf before the three later became apprentices. She became an apprentice in Outcast, mentored by Whitewing. It is said that she wishes her warrior name to be Icestorm. Icecloud is niece to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), granddaughter to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-granddaughter to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Brindleface's parents), grandniece to Frostfur (Brindleface's sister), kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brackenfur, Brightheart (Frostfur's kits), Honeyfern, Poppyfrost, Molepaw, Cinderheart (Brackenfur's kits) and Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter). She's also aunt to Dovepaw, Ivypaw (Birchfall's daughters), Rosepetal and Toadstep (Spiderleg's kits).
In Bramblestar's Storm, she is said to be killed by greencough.


==== Jayfeather ====
Jayfeather is a gray tabby tom with blue eyes, and he is blind. He is the brother of Hollyleaf and Lionblaze as well as the half-brother of Breezepelt, and one of the protagonists of the Power of Three series with his siblings. Jayfeather is currently a full medicine cat in ThunderClan. Initially, Jayfeather wanted to become a warrior, because he desired to be just as important as his littermates to the Clan and felt that the duties of a medicine cat were insignificant compared to the glories a warrior could experience. He began warrior training under his grandmother's cousin Brightheart, but soon tired of it. He did not receive much training and barely explored ThunderClan's territory. In a rebellious act, Jayfeather decides to explore himself. This led to him walking over a cliff in the middle of WindClan's territory and falling into the lake. Luckily, a WindClan patrol consisting of Crowfeather, Heatherpaw, Breezepaw, and Whitetail was nearby, but because of this, Jayfeather is afraid of water after his father, Crowfeather, pulls him out. Later, Spottedleaf persuaded him to become a medicine cat. Jayfeather is very conscious of his condition and adamantly refuses to be treated differently because of it, as he hates the thought of being pitied.
Despite his inability to see, Jayfeather's other senses are greatly magnified and he is often able to navigate just as well as any other cat. His superior sense of smell enables him to diagnose medicinal ailments instantly and from a great distance away, a trait that is obviously ideal for a medicine cat. Jayfeather is able to hear and smell cats approaching from a great distance, well before any other cat nearby. In addition to his heightened senses, Jayfeather was born with a form of extrasensory perception which enables him to read other cats' minds, as well as enter the dreams of other cats and listen in on their conversations with members of StarClan. It is shown in Outcast that this ability extends to cats who do not fall under the jurisdiction of StarClan, such as cats of the Tribe of Rushing Water. Jayfeather's mind-reading abilities can be blocked, however, if the intended target is aware of his intention; Leafpool is aware of her son's ability and consciously damps her thoughts whenever she does not want him in her head. Jayfeather is also unable to read the mind of Sol because his thoughts are so rapid and many that he can't focus on him.
Jayfeather's personality is somewhat on par with Yellowfang in that he is typically grumpy and easily angered. Jayfeather is the first to learn of the prophecy concerning himself and his siblings, and takes its meaning to imply that they are more important than any of the other cats and as such do not have to follow their rules. He has stumbled upon a seemingly insignificant stick which inexplicably emanates the thoughts and feelings of past members of the Ancient Clans, who used to live by the lake long ago. Many fans have claimed that he had a "relationship" with it until he broke it deliberately in The Fourth Apprentice, after finding out that Rock had been lying to him. Jayfeather feels he is on the verge of a great discovery, the implications of which have greater importance than StarClan. He is also aware of Cinderheart's reincarnation. Despite these pieces of knowledge, Jayfeather seems to care about his Clanmates and performs quite well as a medicine cat. Jayfeather has abilities that other medicine cats don't, such as walking in other cat's dreams. One of the first times he did this was when he followed Leafpool to the Moonpool and overheard her dream. Over the course of the series he has become more tolerant of his Clanmates and less irritable, mainly due to his liberal use of mind-reading and being able to sympathize with their thoughts. It was revealed in Long Shadows that Squirrelflight is not his mother. Prior to the release of Sunrise, it was rumoured Leafpool and Crowfeather are his parents because of the attitude and coloring. This is found true which leads to Hollyleaf's so-called "death" and during his naming ceremony, Leafpool felt a feeling of love to him, and, in The New Prophecy series, Leafpool and Crowfeather were alone together at one point when they ran off. He saves Firestar after he is attacked by a fox in "The Fourth Apprentice," although it was too late and he lost another life. He follows Poppyfrost (heavily pregnant with Berrynose's kits, Cherrypaw and Molepaw) to the Moonpool when she wants to see Honeyfern again, and gets attacked by Breezepelt, but Honeyfern drives him and another cat from the Dark Forest (Brokenstar) away. He is the first of the Three to learn about the battle between StarClan and the Dark Forest. Jayfeather is a reincarnation of Jay's Wing, who was an ancient cat. In "Long Shadows", he meets the cat he loves, Half Moon, who later becomes the first Teller of the Pointed Stones. Half Moon reappears in "The Forgotten Warrior" and says that she waits for him forever.
He is great-grandson to Jake and Nutmeg, Firestar's parents.


==== Lionblaze ====
A muscular golden tabby tom with amber eyes and a protagonist of the Power of Three series with his siblings Jayfeather and Hollyleaf and is the half brother of Breezepelt, a WindClan warrior. Lionblaze is secretly taught by the spirits of Tigerstar and Hawkfrost about different battle moves in Dark River. A pretty young WindClan apprentice named Heatherpaw convinces him to form a play Clan called DarkClan inside the underground tunnels, with the leader being Heatherpaw and the deputy being Lionblaze, under the assumed names Heatherstar and Lionclaw, respectively. Lionblaze unknowingly falls in love with her, and she falls in love with him. Hollyleaf and Cinderheart find out about the meetings, and Hollyleaf threatens to tell. Lionblaze hates her nosiness. He enjoys the secret night meetings immensely, but falls behind in his training. One night, Lionblaze teaches Heatherpaw some of Tigerstar's moves and Hawkfrost gets angry, later rebuking him for teaching battle techniques to the enemy. He tells Lionblaze that Heatherpaw will probably use them against him in battle. Lionblaze is devastated, and tells Heatherpaw that he won't see her anymore. She is deeply hurt, but Lionblaze stays true to his word. Soon his battle and hunting skills improve again and his mentor, Ashfur, is pleased. No one is aware of his haunted visits with his apparent grandfather and uncle, and Hollyleaf notices that his fighting skills exceed the level for normal apprentices, and Brambleclaw recognizes his father's fighting moves. She and the other apprentices are horrified as Ashfur and Lionblaze begin a dangerous sort of play-fight, where they act as if the other is an enemy. Hollyleaf notes that Ashfur looked as if he hated Lionblaze with all his heart during the fight, but afterward praised him and acted proud. His power is the ability to remain unharmed during fighting. At the end of Eclipse, Lionblaze has an argument with Tigerstar and Hawkfrost. This could be because of Tigerstar's teaching method and his constant bullying if Lionblaze doesn't train the way Tigerstar wants him to or if Lionblaze tries to talk to Tigerstar and Hawkfrost about the prophecy. He is chosen to mentor Dovepaw, the last of the Three in The Fourth Apprentice. He is chosen to go find out what is causing the water not to flow along with Dovepaw, Tigerheart and Toadfoot of ShadowClan, Petalfur and Rippletail of RiverClan, and Sedgewhisker and Whitetail of WindClan.
Since the beginning of the Omen of the Stars series, Lionblaze has been growing closer to Cinderheart. In Night Whispers, he asks Cinderheart if they are becoming more than friends and she agrees that they are. However, she later learns that Lionblaze is a part of the prophecy and claims that, since StarClan has chosen him to be someone with a greater destiny, she can not become his mate. She grows even more distant when her life as Cinderpelt's reincarnation is revealed. However in The Last Hope, he confronts Cinderheart about their destinies and they become mates, while Cinderpelt's spirit finally joins StarClan.
Prior to the release of Sunrise, it was speculated that Leafpool and Crowfeather were his parents. Also, in the latest "Warriors New" E-Mail, it mentioned "the parentage of a certain trio of ThunderClan cats" as well as "the shocking rumors about who might really be their mother," hinting that the rumor may be true. It was revealed in Long Shadows that Squirrelflight is not his mother, and in Sunrise that Leafpool and Crowfeather are his true parents. Lionblaze's also half-brother to Breezepelt (Crowfeather's other son), grandson to Firestar and Sandstorm (Leafpool's parents) and Ashfoot, the ex-WindClan deputy (and Crowfeather's mother), nephew to Eaglekit (Crowfeather's brother) and Squirrelflight (Leafpool's sister), grandnephew to Princess (Firestar's sister),great-grandson to Jake and Nutmeg (Firestar's parents), half-grandnephew to Scourge, Ruby, and Socks (Firestar's half-siblings) and Ashfur and Ferncloud (Sandstorm's half-siblings) and kin to Cloudtail (Firestar's nephew), Whitewing (Cloudtail's daughter), Dovewing and Ivypool (Whitewing's daughters). He is also kin to Tigerstar, Nightkit and Mistkit (Sandstorm's cousin). As his father, Crowfeather, is a direct descendant to Wind and Gorsestar (WindClan's first and second leaders), Lionblaze is their descendant too. He's a quarter WindClan, a quarter ThunderClan, a quarter kittypet and a quarter SkyClan, because Sandstorm's aunt is Spottedleaf. He is the reincarnation of Lion's Roar, an ancient Tribe cat.


==== Mousewhisker ====
Mousewhisker is a gray-and-white tom, the son of Daisy and Smoky, the brother of Berrynose and Hazeltail, and the half-brother of Rosepetal and Toadstep. He was first introduced as a kit named Mouse in Twilight, when his mother Daisy took him and his littermates away from the horseplace where they were born so the Twolegs there would not take them away. After a ThunderClan patrol found them, they joined ThunderClan and Mouse was given the Clan name of Mousekit. In Sunset, Spottedleaf visits the nursery and shows him and Hazelkit a butterfly, which she says they can hunt, leading Leafpool to discover the truth about the RiverClan medicine cat, Mothwing. He is later an apprentice, Mousepaw, in The Sight, mentored by Spiderleg, and becomes a warrior, Mousewhisker, in Outcast. In the battle in Eclipse he wounds his eye so Hollypaw guides him out of battle. He was the mentor of Bumblestripe. He also trains in the Dark Forest.


==== Millie ====
Millie is a silver tabby she-cat, a former kittypet. She is first formally introduced in The Sight (first book in the Power of Three series), when she and her mate Graystripe show up on the island that the Clan cats use for Gatherings. Though all the cats in every Clan were glad to see Graystripe alive, they were worried about his kittypet mate. She later has three kits: Bumblestripe, Briarlight and Blossomfall. In Long Shadows, Millie is infected with greencough. Silverstream watches over her, because "Graystripe doesn't deserve to have his heart broken again" due to Graystripe going into a cycle of grief after Silverstream died having his kits. In Sunrise, Honeyfern died saving Briarkit from being bitten by a venomous snake. In The Fourth Apprentice, her kits are seen as apprentices. In Fading Echoes her kits receive their warrior names, Briarlight, Blossomfall, and Bumblestripe.


==== Poppyfrost ====
Poppyfrost is a tortoiseshell and white she-cat and the daughter of Brackenfur and Sorreltail. She is also the sister of Cinderheart, Honeyfern, and Molepaw. She was first introduced as a kit, Poppykit, near the end of Twilight, and as an apprentice, Poppypaw, in The Sight, mentored by her uncle, Thornclaw. In The Sight, Poppypaw comes close to dying due to an extreme case of greencough, but Jayfeather heals her by entering her dreams and leading her away from StarClan, and she recovers. She continues her apprenticeship until Eclipse, when she receives her warrior name, Poppyfrost, along with her sister Honeyfern. At the end of The Fourth Apprentice, she gave birth to two unnamed kits, with Berrynose being the father. Later in Fading Echoes, they are called Cherrykit and Molekit (in honor of her deceased brother Molepaw). In "The Fourth Apprentice", she tells Jayfeather that she has always loved Berrynose, even when Honeyfern was alive.
She is niece to Rainwhisker, Sootfur (Sorreltail's brothers), Brightheart, Thornclaw and Cinderpelt (Brackenfur's siblings), granddaughter to Willowpelt and Whitestorm (Sorreltail's parents) and Frostfur (Brackenfur's mother), grandniece to Spottedleaf, Redtail, Patchpelt, Leopardfoot (Willowpelt's siblings) and Brindleface, Dustpelt and Ravenpaw (Frostfur's siblings), great-granddaughter to Snowfur and Thistleclaw (Whitestorm's parents), Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Willowpelt's parents) and Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Frostfur's parents), great-grandniece to Sweetpaw, Rosetail (Thistleclaw's sisters) and Bluestar (Snowfur's sister), great-great-granddaughter to Windflight and Poppydawn (Thistleclaw's parents), Stormtail and Moonflower (Snowfur's parents), great-great-grandniece to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), cousin to Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter), grandcousin to Dovepaw and Ivypaw (Whitewing's daughters) and kin to Ferncloud, Ashfur (Brindleface's kits), Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Larchkit, Hollykit, Birchfall, Foxleap, Icecloud (Ferncloud's kits), Toadstep, Rosepetal (Spiderleg's kits), Tigerstar, Mistkit, Nightkit (Leopardfoot's kits), Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Hawkfrost, Mothwing, Tadpole (Tigerstar's kits), Tigerheart, Dawnpelt, Flametail (Tawnypelt's kits), Stonefur, Mistyfoot, Mosskit (Bluestar's kits). Poppyfrost's also related to SkyClan by Swiftbreeze being a direct descendant of Spottedpelt, Cloudstar and Birdflight's daughter, and sister to Gorseclaw, whose direct descendant is Sweetbriar, mother to Pinestar, former leader of ThunderClan.


==== Thunder ====
In the Dawn of the Clans arc, he is first introduced as Clear Sky and Storm's son in the first book, The Sun Trail, who was the only one to survive the collapse of the house that he was born in. Gray Wing, Clear Sky's brother and Thunder's uncle, takes him in and raises him when Clear Sky rejects him. In Thunder Rising, Clear Sky realizes his mistake, inviting Thunder to live with him. Thunder accepts quickly, longing to know his true father.
When he realizes that Clear Sky does not care about the needs of the individual, only thinking of the group as a whole, Thunder leaves him, returning to Gray Wing.
A StarClan warrior currently, Thunder was first introduced in Secrets of the Clans as the first leader of ThunderClan, which was named after him. When the Clans were formed, he was the best hunter in the forest. Legend says he was the one who "put in the more compassionate parts of the warrior code." He was an orange tom with white paws. However, he is only mentioned in the main storyline in Long Shadows in the prologue, where he and the other "founding leaders" (River, Shadow and Wind) are questioning Midnight, a badger who told Sol information about the Clans. It was revealed in a recent Erin Hunter chat, that Shadow, Wind, River, and Thunder did not take "star" after their names because that part of their traditions had not been established yet.


==== Whitewing ====
Whitewing is a white she-cat with green eyes. She is first introduced as a kit, Whitekit, in the epilogue of Firestar's Quest though she is almost an apprentice already, and as an apprentice, Whitepaw, throughout the New Prophecy series. She is one of two daughters of Cloudtail and Brightheart. In between Sunset and The Sight, she becomes a warrior, Whitewing. She was appointed much later than she could have been because she herself had wanted to remain behind so Birchpaw would not be the only apprentice. This is later confirmed when Birchfall complains about her getting an apprentice, with Sandstorm reminding him that Whitewing requested to stay an apprentice. She was mentored by her uncle Brackenfur and received her first apprentice, Icepaw, in Outcast. It is confirmed by the end of Long Shadows that she is carrying Birchfall's kits, so therefore her status is now a queen. In Sunrise she gave birth to two kits, Dovewing and Ivypool, of which Dovewing will become the last cat in the prophecy of the Power of Three, but as revealed in The Last Hope, Dovewing is, in fact, the third cat, with Firestar being the last and the fourth. Whitewing's also granddaughter to Princess (Cloudtail's mother) and Frostfur (Brightheart's mother), great-niece to Firestar (Princess' brother), Brindleface, Longtail, Dustpelt and Ravenpaw (Frostfur's siblings), great-granddaughter to Fuzzypelt and Robinwing (Frostfur's parents), half-great-niece to Scourge, Ruby and Socks (Princess' half-siblings), niece to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw and Brackenfur (Brightheart's siblings), cousin to Honeyfern, Molepaw, Poppyfrost and Cinderheart (Brackenfur's kits) and kin to Leafpool, Squirrelflight (Firestar's daughters), Jayfeather, Lionblaze, Hollyleaf (Leafpool's kits), Sandstorm, Ferncloud and Ashfur (Brindleface's kits), Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Hollykit, Larchkit, Birchfall, Icecloud and Foxleap (Ferncloud's kits) and Toadstep and Rosepetal (Spiderleg's kits).


==== Rosepetal ====
Rosepetal is a dark cream she-cat first introduced in Outcast. It is revealed she has a crush on a ThunderClan tom, Foxleap. She is the daughter of Daisy and Spiderleg, the littermate of Toadstep, and the half-sister of Mousewhisker, Berrynose, and Hazeltail. She and Toadstep are made warriors in The Fourth Apprentice. Her warrior name is Rosepetal, her mentor was Squirrelflight. Rosepetal's also niece to Shrewpaw, Larchkit, Hollykit, Birchfall, Icecloud and Foxleap (Spiderleg's siblings), cousin to Ivypool and Dovewing (Birchfall's daughters), granddaughter to Ferncloud and Dustpelt (Spiderleg's parents), grandniece to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), great-granddaughter to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-great-granddaughter to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Brindleface's parents), great-grandniece to Frostfur (Brindleface's sister) and kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brightheart, Brackenfur (Frostfur's kits), Honeyfern, Molepaw, Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Lilyheart, and Seedpaw (Brackenfur's kits), Cherrypaw and Molepaw (Poppyfrost's kits), Dewnose, Ambermoon, Whitewing, and Snowbush (Brightheart's kits). Also related to Firestar, Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Hollyleaf.


==== Toadstep ====
Toadstep is a black-and-white tom, first introduced in Outcast, along with his sister Rosepetal. He is the son of Daisy and Spiderleg, and the half-brother of Mousewhisker, Berrynose, and Hazeltail. In The Fourth Apprentice, Toadstep was given his warrior name. He was mentored by Cloudtail. Toadstep's also nephew to Shrewpaw, Larchkit, Hollykit, Birchfall, Icecloud and Foxleap (Spiderleg's siblings), cousin to Ivypool and Dovewing (Birchfall's daughters), grandson to Ferncloud and Dustpelt (Spiderleg's parents), grandnephew to Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), great-grandson to Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-great-grandson to Robinwing and Fuzzypelt (Brindleface's parents), great-grandnephew to Frostfur (Brindleface's sister) and kin to Cinderpelt, Thornclaw, Brightheart, Brackenfur (Frostfur's kits), Honeyfern, Molepaw, Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Lilykit, Seedkit (Brackenfur's kits), Cherrypaw and Molepaw (Poppyfrost's kits) and Whitewing (Brightheart's daughter).
In Bramblestar's Storm, he is said to be killed by greencough.


=== Omen of the Stars Series ===
Omen of the Stars is the fourth series in Warriors. The titles of all six books have been revealed: The Fourth Apprentice and Fading Echoes. The third book's title is Night Whispers. A fourth book has also come out, called Sign of the Moon, which came out in April 2011. The fifth book is called The Forgotten Warrior. The final book in the series is titled The Last Hope. The fourth series is centered on two sisters, Dovewing and Ivypool, and which one of them is the third cat in the prophecy, as well as around Lionblaze and Jayfeather, the other two cats in the prophecy. In Bluestar's Prophecy, it is revealed that both of the kits' grandmothers are Frostfur and Brindleface, who in the book are said to be sisters (Frostfur  Brightheart  Whitewing; Brindleface  Ferncloud  Birchfall). This either means that the book is incorrect or Dovepaw and Ivypaw's mother and father are related. This is not significant, as most of the Clan cats are related anyways.


==== Dovewing ====
 Dovewing, a fluffy pale gray she-cat whose eye color has been alternately described as golden and green, but are actually blue. She is the daughter of Whitewing and Birchfall, and sister of Ivypool. She was born at the end of Sunrise and it is mentioned that either she or her sister is the third cat of the prophecy, as Hollyleaf wasn't really part of the prophecy. Her mentor is Lionblaze. In The Fourth Apprentice, it is revealed that her power is the ability to hear and see things that are very far away. Dovepaw is later found to be the third cat of the prophecy. Even though Dovepaw is excited about being the third cat in the prophecy, she hates to hide the secret from her clanmates. In Night Whispers, Dovepaw ends up telling Ivypaw why she has such good senses; Ivypaw forgives her. When she asks Jayfeather why she has to keep the secret from every cat, he asks her if she even wants to be special. She says yes, even if she doesn't. During her warrior assessment, when she decides to turn off her powers because other cats can hunt without special powers, she admits in her thoughts that Ivypool deserves to be a warrior more than she does.
It is also rumored that Dovepaw may have a small crush on Tigerheart of ShadowClan. This is confirmed in Night Whispers, when the two of them admitted their feelings for each other. They began meeting on the ShadowClan-ThunderClan border by night, and at one point Dovepaw mentioned to Tigerheart that ThunderClan had some catmint, a herb which could cure ShadowClan's sick medicine cat Littlecloud but which was supposed to be a secret. Tigerheart told ShadowClan this information, and at one point Ivypaw was captured to get the catmint. In the books afterwards, Tigerheart seems to want to stay away from Dovewing to avoid speaking to her, though he does not believe that Jayfeather killed Flametail, unlike Dawnpelt. In the Sign of the Moon, Dovepaw earns her warrior name Dovewing. In The Forgotten Warrior, she falls in love with Bumblestripe.
Dovewing is also granddaughter to Cloudtail and Brightheart (Whitewing's parents) and Dustpelt and Ferncloud (Birchfall's parents), great-granddaughter to Princess (Cloudtail's mother), Frostfur (Brightheart's mother), Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother) and kin to Leafpool, Squirrelflight (Firestar's daughters), Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, Sorreltail, Honeyfern, Molepaw, Cinderheart and Poppyfrost. During her warrior assessment, Icecloud falls through the tunnels that supposedly buried Hollyleaf. Dovewing then rescues her, leading Jayfeather and Lionblaze to the fact that Hollyleaf might not be dead. Dovewing is the reincarnation of Dove's Wing, an ancient cat.


==== Ivypool ====
 Ivypool, a silver tabby-and-white she-cat with dark blue eyes, is the daughter of Whitewing and Birchfall, and sister of Dovewing. She was born at the end of Sunrise and it is mentioned that either she or her sister is the third cat of the prophecy, as Hollyleaf wasn't really part of the prophecy. When revealed by Vicky Holmes that Dovepaw will be the Fourth Apprentice, she also stated that Ivypaw will not be happy about her sister's new found powers. Ivypaw's mentor is Cinderheart. In The Fourth Apprentice, Ivypaw becomes jealous of Dovepaw because she gets to go on the journey upriver to find the source of the problem of the drying up lake (which is later revealed to be beavers). At the end of the book when Lionblaze and Dovepaw return, she seems to get over her jealousy. But in Fading Echoes, Ivypaw becomes jealous of her sister again (this is after Firestar discovers that Jayfeather, Lionblaze and Dovepaw are the Three). Later on she begins to be trained in her dreams by Hawkfrost, thinking he's a StarClan warrior. Ivypaw then begins to feel special because "Dovepaw has never been visited by a StarClan warrior, she would have told me". At first Ivypaw seems happy to inform her sister that she was visited by a StarClan cat in her dreams, but decides against it later out of jealousy. She also does this because she "wants to have a secret too". In Night Whispers, she is kidnapped by ShadowClan. She is later traded for catmint because Littlecloud was ill with greencough. She continues to visit the Dark Forest in Night Whispers, but realizes their evil intentions towards the end of the book and decides to keep going to the Dark Forest to spy on them for Dovepaw, Jayfeather, and Lionblaze. While there, Brokenstar tells her to kill the already dead Flametail, to keep him from helping ShadowClan. She agrees in order to gain Brokenstar's trust, but is stopped by Tigerheart. In the Sign of the Moon, she earns her warrior name Ivypool, based on a real life girl Ivy Poole.
Ivypaw's also niece to Spiderleg, Shrewpaw, Icepaw, Foxpaw, Hollykit, and Larchkit (Birchfall's siblings), cousin to Rosepetal and Toadstep (Spiderleg's kits), granddaughter to Cloudtail and Brightheart (Whitewing's parents) and Dustpelt and Ferncloud (Birchfall's parents), greatniece to Thornclaw, Cinderpelt, and Brackenfur (Brightheart's siblings), Frostfur, Brindleface, and Ravenpaw (Dustpelt's siblings) and Ashfur (Ferncloud's brother), half-greatniece to Sandstorm (Ferncloud's half-sister) and Longtail (Dustpelt's half-brother), great-granddaughter to Princess (Cloudtail's mother), Frostfur (Brightheart's mother) and Brindleface (Ferncloud's mother), great-greatniece to Firestar (Princess's brother), and kin to Leafpool, Squirrelflight, Jayfeather, Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, Honeyfern, Molepaw, Cinderheart and Poppyfrost.


==== Mapleshade ====
Mapleshade is a warrior of the Dark Forest who was previously a ThunderClan warrior. She visits Crookedkit (later Crookedstar) of RiverClan in dreams and visions starting before his apprenticeship, training him in exchange for his promise that he would place loyalty to his Clan above all other concerns.
At first Crookedkit believes Mapleshade is one of StarClan. Her anger at his attachment to individual Clanmates confuses him. He obeys her when a dog attacks the RiverClan camp, chasing the dog and protecting the Clan instead of tending to the fatal injury delivered to his mother, Rainflower. Crookedstar suspects Mapleshade is responsible for sending the crooked-jawed squirrel sign that convinces Hailstar to make Crookedjaw his deputy after Shellheart retires to the elders' den. When Hailstar is injured on his last life, she headbutts Crookedjaw away while he attempts to save Hailstar's life.
Eventually, Mapleshade acknowledges to Crookedstar that she is not of StarClan but from the Dark Forest, and explains her evil actions and deceptions: she is originally a ThunderClan cat, but when ThunderClan discovers she is the mate of a RiverClan cat they cast her out. While fleeing from ThunderClan to RiverClan along with her two kits to be with her mate, her kits are swept away by the river current. Her RiverClan mate blames her for the kits' deaths, and she finds herself unwelcome in RiverClan as well. When her former mate takes another she-cat as his mate, after having promised to love Mapleshade forever, embittered by the lack of loyalty she perceived, she renounced StarClan and swore revenge on her former mate and his descendants. Lastly Mapleshade reveals that Shellheart, Crookedstar's father, was the grandson of her former mate, and that she feels her own descendants should have attained the greatness that is Crookedstar's destiny. Crookedstar blames Mapleshade for the illness (greencough) and death of his mate Willowbreeze and two of their newborn kits, Willowkit and Minnowkit, in addition to the earlier deaths of Rainflower and Hailstar. She is responsible for killing Spottedleaf a second time.


==== Cherryfall ====
 Cherryfall is the daughter of Berrynose and Poppyfrost, sister of Molewhisker. Cherryfall is a ginger she-cat. When she was being born, Jayfeather saw that the Dark Forest cats were watching her and her brother (Molewhisker). In The Forgotten Warrior, Cherrykit and Molekit receive their apprentice names Cherrypaw and Molepaw. In The Forgotten Warrior, she ate a rotten vole and took the wrong herb, along with Mousewhisker. Cinderheart and Leafpool had to help them. In Bramblestar's Storm her warrior name, Cherryfall, is revealed.


==== Molewhisker ====
 Molewhisker is the son of Berrynose and Poppyfrost, brother of Cherryfall. Named after Poppyfrost's brother Molepaw, who died young. Molewhisker is a brown-and-cream tom. In The Forgotten Warrior, he and Cherrykit receive their apprentice names. In Bramblestar's Storm, he has his warrior name, Molewhisker.


==== Seedpaw ====
 Seedpaw is the daughter of Brackenfur and Sorreltail, sister of Lilykit.Seedkit is also sister to Poppyfrost and Cinderheart and that makes her aunt to Cherrypaw and Molepaw. She was born out in the forest, where Sorreltail had been taking a walk and began to feel pains. Luckily, Jayfeather got to her in time to ease her pain as she gave birth.
In Bramblestar's Storm, she is Seedpaw and is mentored by Bumblestripe. However, Seedpaw dies in an effort to retrieve the lost stick of the fallen warriors from the great battle.


==== Lilyheart ====
 Lilyheart is the daughter of Brackenfur and Sorreltail, sister of Seedkit. Lilykit is a tortoiseshell she-cat. She and Seedkit are not mentioned very much in The Forgotten Warrior. At the end of The Forgotten Warrior, the kits are about two moons old. They are the fifth and sixth children of Brackenfur and Sorreltail. In Bramblestar's Storm, she is Lilypaw and is mentored by Poppyfrost. She gets her warrior name, Lilyheart at the end of the book. In the working characters list for Warriors: A Vision of Shadows: The Apprentice's Quest, she and Snowbush (formerly Snowkit, son of Cloudtail and Brightheart) have had kits together.


=== Minor ThunderClan characters ===
The following are ThunderClan characters introduced or appearing in the Warriors novel series, having small, less significant, and/or single instances in the story. It was revealed in an Erin Hunter Chat that the warriors family tree from the "official" warriors site was made up by fans with overactive imaginations, so most lineages from the site are false.


== RiverClan ==
RiverClan is a water-native Clan, known for the river that runs throughout their territory. RiverClan cats have the unique ability to swim well in fast-moving water, and are generally among the only cats that possess the knowledge of fishing. Due to their main diet of fish, their pelts are typically silkier and glossier than most other Clans', which grants them increased mobility in water. Their prey also includes some aquatic mammals, such as water voles. RiverClan often have border disputes with ThunderClan over the Sunningrocks, a section of land on ThunderClan's side of the river that ThunderClan claimed from them a long time ago (it was formerly an island). They are not openly hostile, but can be prone to ally themselves with potentially hostile Clans (namely ShadowClan). The reason for this is usually based on the rationale of relative strength; RiverClan's leaders tend to think that joining a powerful adversary instead of standing against them is more beneficial for their Clan in the long run.
RiverClan, along with some of the other Clans, undergoes a dramatic shift in territory during the course of The New Prophecy series. During the time that Stormfur, Feathertail, and the others are on their journey, not much of RiverClan's territory is destroyed as the Twolegs proceed with their deforestation of the area. Eventually, RiverClan and the other Clans are able to relocate to the lake territory, the RiverClan camp of which is set in a wetland bordered by small rivers. RiverClan's lake territory consists of a variety of terrain, including a small strip of pine forest on the border with ShadowClan, and open moorland bordering WindClan. RiverClan is also closest to the newly designated Gathering location, an island located closely off their shores. Fish remain the main diet of RiverClan. Their territory is routinely disturbed by Twolegs during the spring and summer seasons, due to a water recreation area being located on their grounds.


=== Crookedstar's Promise ===


==== Crookedstar ====
Crookedstar, a huge light-colored tabby tom with green eyes, is the leader of RiverClan during the first half of the original series. He has a twisted jaw, the result of an event during his kithood, which gives him his warrior name of Crookedjaw. Crookedstar's brother, Oakheart, was made a warrior before him because he broke his jaw as a kit when play-fighting. His mother Rainflower disowns him because of his ugly face, and seems to prefer Oakheart over him,but his father, Shellheart, continues to love him and Oakheart equally. As an apprentice Crookedpaw became friends with Bluepaw. The spirit of an evil ThunderClan she-cat named Mapleshade asks him to promise to devote his entire life to RiverClan. He agrees, but his family dies as a result of his promise (or so he believes), including his father, Shellheart, his mother, Rainflower, and his brother, Oakheart. When he becomes RiverClan deputy, he ended his friendship with her. He became leader when Hailstar died of a rat bite. His first deputy was Timberfur. He asked his brother Oakheart first, but he declined saying he had not earned the title yet. Crookedstar's leadership is generally not described in detail during the series. He allies his Clan with ShadowClan in an effort to attack WindClan during the climax of Fire and Ice, proving that he is not afraid of fighting.
Crookedstar's relationships with the other cats in his Clan are relatively unknown, a trend that is common for non-ThunderClan cats. His mate is Willowbreeze and they have three daughters Willowkit, Minnowkit and Silverstream. He has a soft side for his daughter Silverstream. It could be thought that Silverstream led Crookedstar to StarClan when he died. It is also revealed in Bluestar's Prophecy that his brother is Oakheart, making Crookedstar uncle to Mistystar, Stonefur and Mosskit, Bluestar's kits. He's also son to Rainflower and Shellheart, granduncle to Graymist and Reedwhisker (Mistystar's kits), great-grand uncle to Mallownose and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits), grandfather to Stormfur and Feathertail, and great-grandfather to Pine and Lark (Stormfur's kits). He dies of illness in A Dangerous Path. In Bramblestar's Storm, Mallownose and Petalfur's three kits are born, making him great-great-grand uncle to them.


==== Graypool ====
Graypool, a thin gray she-cat with patchy fur, a scarred muzzle and amber eyes, is a half-WindClan, half-RiverClan elder and queen introduced in Forest of Secrets. She was entrusted by Oakheart to look after the two kits he had claimed to have found in the forest, which are later revealed to be Mistystar and Stonefur, the kits of Bluestar. She realizes that they are from ThunderClan by their smell and that Oakheart was not truthful in his story of how he found them, but she does not pursue the matter out of the kindness in her heart. She raises Mistystar and Stonefur as if they were her own kits, and finally reveals their origin to Firestar during his investigation. In addition to fostering Mistystar and Stonefur, she is the true mother of one unnamed tabby kit introduced in Forest of Secrets. In A Dangerous Path, she mistakes Tigerstar for Oakheart and tells him about the kits. She realizes that he is not Oakheart and backs away and dies tumbling down a slope, hitting her head against a rock. Her mother's name was Fallowtail, and she had at least one sister, Willowbreeze, who later became Silverstream's mother, and she also mothered Minnowkit and Willowkit. Her father was Reedfeather of WindClan (as revealed in Battle of the Clans). Because she and her sister, Willowbreeze, were half-WindClan and half-Riverclan, their mother, Fallowtail, wanted them to be named -breeze, for WindClan, and -pool, for RiverClan, so that they would always remember their heritage.


==== Mistystar ====
Mistystar a blue-gray she-cat with bright blue eyes like Bluestar's, is a RiverClan warrior prominently introduced in Forest of Secrets and is the current RiverClan leader. Mistystar initially becomes friends with Fireheart and Graystripe when they rescue her kits, who had been stranded by a river flood during Forest of Secrets. She then becomes something of an ally to Firestar and Graystripe, giving them valuable information from across the river from time to time, but without revealing Clan secrets. After Fireheart and Graystripe save the kits, they have to sleep in the apprentice den. Mistyfoot and her brother, Stonefur, become the focus of a large sub-plot in the series when it is discovered that they are in fact the children of Bluestar, thus making them of "half-Clan" origin. They are initially furious with Bluestar when confronted by her about this, but forgive her and stay to comfort her as she dies at the end of A Dangerous Path. Mistystar and Stonefur are later the targets of discrimination from Tigerstar after he learns of their true mother, and he holds them prisoner outside the RiverClan camp during his rule in The Darkest Hour. While Stonefur is killed, Mistyfoot escapes with the help of Fireheart, Graystripe, and Ravenpaw along with Feathertail and Stormfur, who were also being held prisoner. She later joins the battle against BloodClan along with her remaining Clanmates.
Mistyfoot is appointed deputy by Leopardstar after the death of her previous deputy, Stonefur, who is Mistyfoot's brother, at the paws of Darkstripe and Blackfoot. She is later captured by Twolegs during the deforestation of the Clans' territories during The New Prophecy series and held in a barn along with other captive cats such as Leafpool, Brightheart and Cloudtail. After her escape due to the assistance of ThunderClan, she returns to RiverClan to retake her position as deputy, to which Hawkfrost had been appointed in her absence.
Mistystar is the new leader, as of the second book in Omen Of The Stars, Fading Echoes, with her son Reedwhisker as her deputy. Her paternal grandmother's name was Rainflower and her paternal grandfather's name was Shellheart, and her uncle was Crookedstar, making Silverstream her cousin, and best friend. Mistystar's also mother to Graymist (Reedwhisker's sister) making her grandmother to Mallownose and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits), niece to Snowfur (Bluestar's sister), cousin to Whitestorm, granddaughter to Moonflower and Stormtail (Bluestar's parents), grandniece to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), grandcousin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Whitestorm's kits), Stormfur and Feathertail (Silverstream's kits) and great-grandcousin to Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine) (Stormfur's kits) and Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Molepaw and Cinderheart (Sorreltail's kits). She is great-great grandcousin to Molepaw and Cherrypaw (Poppyfrost's kits). Mistystar mentored Feathertail.
It is noted that Reedwhisker is her son, but three kits named Primrosepaw, Perchkit, and Pikekit may also be her kits, as in Secrets of the Clans, when there is a flood, it states that two of her kits are safe, while the other two are lost and found by Firestar and Graystripe, meaning that she has four kits. Perchkit gives Mistystar her last life.


==== Stonefur ====
Stonefur, a blue-gray tom with battle-scarred ears, is a RiverClan warrior first properly introduced in Forest of Secrets. He is the brother of Mistyfoot and Mosskit, and enters into Firestar's point of view far less frequently than his sister. As a result, not much is known about Stonefur aside from his intense loyalty and willingness to fight for his Clan as evidenced by his mostly tattered ears. After Crookedstar dies and Leopardstar is appointed leader, she gives Stonefur the position of deputy. Stonefur is equally as angry as his sister when it is revealed that they are actually the kits of Bluestar, but they forgive their mother before she dies at the end of A Dangerous Path.
Stonefur is one of the "half-Clan" cats accused during Tigerstar's rule over TigerClan during The Darkest Hour, and is ordered to kill his apprentice, Stormpaw, and his sister, Featherpaw, in order to prove his loyalty. When he refuses, Tigerstar orders Darkstripe to kill him. Stonefur, despite being half-starved and weakened due to his imprisonment, defeats Darkstripe soundly. Tigerstar then orders Blackfoot to finish the job, and Stonefur's throat is torn out by Darkstripe while Blackfoot holds him down.
Stonefur's parents are Oakheart and Bluestar, though he was fostered by Graypool. He has two sisters, Mistyfoot and Mosskit, and two cousins, Silverstream and Whitestorm, due to the facts that Oakheart and Crookedstar are brothers and Crookedstar is Silverstream's father and Whitestorm's mother, Snowfur, is Bluestar's sister. He has mentored Stormfur and Shadepelt, and was apprenticed by his uncle, Crookedstar. Bluestar named her kits after the river: Moss-, Misty-, and Stone-. Stonefur's also nephew to Snowfur (Bluestar's sister), grandson to Moonflower and Stormtail (Bluestar's parents) and Rainflower and Shellheart (Oakheart's parents even though Lilystem was noted as his mother in a book), grandnephew to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), grandcousin to Stormfur, Feathertail (Silverstream's kits), Rainwhisker, Sootfur and Sorreltail (Whitestorm's kits), great-grandcousin to Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Honeyfern and Molepaw (Sorreltail's kits), great great-grandcousin to Cherrypaw and Molepaw (Poppyfrost's kits), uncle to Graymist and Reedwhisker(Mistystar's kits) and granduncle to Mallowpaw and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits).


==== Oakheart ====
Oakheart is a tawny colored tom with green eyes. He is brother to Crookedstar and son of Rainflower (in a previous book, his mother was named "Lilystem"). He was mate to Bluestar, but only for a short time, and father to Stonefur, Mistyfoot (later Mistystar), and Mosskit. He is the grandfather of Pikepaw, Primerosepaw, Perchkit, Graymist, and Reedwhisker, great-grandfather to Mallowpaw and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits), as well as uncle to Silverstream, great-uncle to Stormfur and Feathertail (Silverstream's kits) and great-great-uncle to Pine and Lark (Stormfur's kits). Mentioned in Into the Wild, his backstory is further explored in Forest of Secrets and Crookedstar's Promise. Previous deputy of RiverClan before being killed by a rockfall during a battle with ThunderClan, contrary to belief that Tigerstar killed him after he killed Redtail, shortly before Firestar enters the forest.


==== Brambleberry ====
Brambleberry is a white she-cat with black spotted fur, blue eyes, and a strikingly pink nose. A medicine cat, she nursed Crookedstar back to health when he was a kit and was the mentor of Mudfur when he gave up his warrior life. She was mentored by Milkfur. She shared a special bond with Crookedstar, because when he was a kit, she was the only one to see past his jaw, and realize that he had a great destiny far beyond any other cat's as his own. At Crookedstar's death, she is there and is the one who leads him to StarClan.


=== Warriors (Original Series) ===
The original series covers events in the story from Into the Wild to The Darkest Hour. Many characters mentioned here were introduced in the original series, but play minor or significant roles in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series as well.


==== Leopardstar ====
Leopardstar (Leopardfur before A Dangerous Path), an unusually spotted golden tabby she-cat with amber eyes, preceded Mistystar as leader of RiverClan and was introduced in Fire and Ice. Initially she is appointed deputy after the death of Oakheart, RiverClan's former deputy, during the opening sequence of Into the Wild. She is highly ambitious, and assumes a strong and authoritative hold over her Clan after the death of its former leader, Crookedstar. Leopardstar is known for being highly aggressive to all other Clans, especially ThunderClan, with whom RiverClan has had an ongoing border dispute over the Sunningrocks in the forest. Her mother, Brightsky, died at her birth, along with her three other siblings. Her father was Mudfur before he became medicine cat apprentice when Leopardstar was only an apprentice. She was known as a loved kit, able to wrap her tail around anyone. She was named by her father who called her Leopardkit so the mighty Clan could give her strength. She is the first (and consequently, only) leader to align her Clan with Tigerstar in the creation of TigerClan during his attempts to rule the forest in The Darkest Hour.
Despite Leopardstar's numerous hostile encounters with ThunderClan and WindClan and her affiliation with Tigerstar, she does not appear to be an evil cat. She regards her relations with other Clans in a strictly businesslike manner, and does not harbor personal resentment against any particular cat except Graystripe, who accidentally killed her former apprentice Whiteclaw. She and the leader at that time, Crookedstar, willingly allows ThunderClan to shelter in her camp after the forest is burnt out in Rising Storm, and treats the situation as an opportunity to retake the Sunningrocks as a form of "payment".
Her apprentices include Whiteclaw, who was accidentally killed by Graystripe in Fire and Ice, and Hawkfrost, yet another result of faulty character judgment. Her mentor was Whitefang.
Leopardstar loses her final life in Fading Echoes. She is replaced by her deputy, Mistyfoot, now Mistystar. Mistystar is Bluestar's daughter, and is said to meet Stonefur, Silverstream, and Bluestar in Fading Echoes, although this may not be true. The Erins also said after news of Leopardstar's death reached fans that one of the true reasons why she had allied her Clan with Tigerstar in The Darkest Hour was because she was in love with Tigerstar.


==== Silverstream ====
Silverstream, a beautiful silver tabby she-cat with blue eyes, is a RiverClan warrior introduced in Fire and Ice. She is the daughter of Crookedstar, RiverClan's leader, and Willowbreeze, and as such is a highly valued member of RiverClan. She initially meets Fireheart and Graystripe when she appears in order to rescue Graystripe from drowning in the river that divides RiverClan's and ThunderClan's borders. She falls in love with Graystripe shortly after, and sneaks out of her camp in order to meet him at the border, having her cousin Mistyfoot cover for her absences in much the same way that Fireheart covers for Graystripe. When it becomes clear that he cannot force Graystripe to stop sneaking out, Fireheart attempts to reason with Silverstream instead; the result is similar. Eventually Fireheart accepts that he cannot force them apart, and he and Silverstream become slight friends. He refuses to attack her during a battle with RiverClan in WindClan's territory during the end sequence of Fire and Ice due to Graystripe's pleading.
It is eventually revealed that Silverstream is pregnant with Graystripe's kits, Featherkit and Stormkit. When she finally gives birth to them in Forest of Secrets, Graystripe realizes that something is wrong and fetches Fireheart and Cinderpelt to assist her. Cinderpelt successfully saves the kits, but is unable to help Silverstream; in a bitter twist of fate, she dies shortly afterward due to birth complications. Graystripe joins RiverClan momentarily before returning to ThunderClan, since he realizes that no matter how strong his love for Silverstream is, his loyalty remains in ThunderClan.
Silverstream, now a member of StarClan, returns during Firestar's leader ceremony in The Darkest Hour to give him one of his nine lives. She is shown to still love Graystripe dearly during this scene, but is unable to speak to Firestar regarding her feelings. Later, she appears to Graystripe during his journey back to the lake territory in Graystripe's Trilogy in order to assure him of her acceptance of his new mate, Millie. She also appears to accompany Feathertail, her daughter, upon her death in the mountains in Moonrise of The New Prophecy. During "Long Shadows", she watches over Millie who is sick with greencough. She says Graystripe doesn't deserve to have his heart broken again. Silverstream's also granddaughter to Rainflower (Crookedstar's mother), niece to Oakheart, cousin to Mistyfoot (who is also was her best friend), Stonefur and Mosskit (Bluestar and Oakheart's kits), grandcousin to Graymist and Reedwhisker (Mistyfoot's kits) and great-grandcousin to Mallownose and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits). Not only are Silverstream and Mistyfoot's fathers brothers, but Sliverstream's mother, Willowbreeze, and Mistyfoot's adopted mother, Graypool, are sisters. Willowbreeze and Graypool are half-WindClan half-RiverClan, which makes Silverstream's kits a WindClan, RiverClan, ThunderClan mix.


==== River ====
"River" is a silver, sleek, long-furred tom with green eyes that became RiverClan's founding leader. He was the first cat who had no fear of water. He was generous and warmhearted with his own Clan, but had no interest in the lives of the other Clans. In Secrets of the Clans, the Erins revealed he would skip Gatherings if he could. In Dawn of the Clans, his warrior name was River Ripple. He was the second one to suggest leadership under one of the four, saying that he should be the leader of all of the cats. He has a liking for water and fish.


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The New Prophecy series covers events in the story from Midnight to Sunset. Many characters here were first mentioned in the original series, but had minor or insignificant roles. In addition, as with the original series, most characters listed here play minor or significant roles in the following series, Power of Three, as well.


==== Feathertail ====
Feathertail is a beautiful young tabby she-cat with a silvery-gray coat and deep blue eyes. She is the daughter of Graystripe and Silverstream, the sister of Stormfur, and the half-sister of Bumblestripe, Briarlight, and Blossomfall. Feathertail is first introduced as a kit in Forest of Secrets, along with her brother, when they are born by their mother, Silverstream, as she bleeds out her life at Sunningrocks in ThunderClan territory. After their mother's death, they were briefly fostered by Goldenflower (who was still nursing Bramblekit and Tawnykit) while they stayed in ThunderClan before their father, Graystripe, takes them to RiverClan. They were said to be fostered by a queen named Darkflower when they arrived in RiverClan although in later books the role was given to another queen, Mosspelt. Regardless their father decides to stay with them as he couldn't bear to be separated from them; as a result she and Stormfur were always keenly aware of who their father was and remained close to him despite the fact that he later returned to ThunderClan. Featherkit becomes an apprentice, Featherpaw, along with her brother in A Dangerous Path, after their father is driven out of RiverClan because he refused to attack his best friend Fireheart during a battle. She was mentored by her mother's cousin, Mistyfoot. Later, in The Darkest Hour, she, Mistyfoot, and her brother Stormpaw are imprisoned under Tigerstar's orders for being half-Clan cats, as he now rules RiverClan and ShadowClan under the TigerClan alliance. Stormpaw's mentor and Mistyfoot's brother Stonefur is ordered to kill her and Stormpaw in order to prove his loyalty, but refuses and is killed instead. Featherpaw, Stormpaw, and Mistyfoot are later rescued by Graystripe, Fireheart, and Ravenpaw and taken to ThunderClan, where they remain until BloodClan is defeated and the Clans revert to four again. Featherpaw also participates in the battle between LionClan and BloodClan, along with her brother.
She is seen as a warrior, Feathertail, in Midnight, and is chosen by StarClan as the RiverClan representative on the journey to the sun-drown-place. Though her brother Stormfur did not receive the message, he chooses to go with her out of concern for his sister. Throughout the course of the journey, Feathertail begins to develop feelings for Crowpaw, the WindClan representative. They soon fall in love, but unfortunately Feathertail is killed when she dies to protect him and the Tribe of Rushing Water from Sharptooth, a mountain lion, in Moonrise. She now walks with her mother, Silverstream, with a paw in both StarClan and the Tribe of Endless Hunting (this might imply that the two sets of ancestors can now communicate with each other). Later, Crowpaw chooses his warrior name, Crowfeather, in her honor. Feathertail appears to Leafpool in her dreams to help her teach Willowpaw, a RiverClan medicine cat, about StarClan and once to send a message to Crowfeather 'not to be blinded to the living.' This seemed to be Feathertail's way of accepting his relationship with Leafpool.
Feathertail's also granddaughter to Crookedstar (Silverstream's father), grandniece to Oakheart, great-granddaughter to Rainflower and Shellheart, and kin to Stonefur, Mistyfoot (who was her mentor), Mosskit (Oakheart's kits), Graymist, Reedwhisker, Primrosepaw, Pikepaw, Perchkit (Mistystar's kits) Sneezepaw and Mallowpaw (Graymist's kits).


==== Hawkfrost ====
Hawkfrost is a dark brown tabby tom with a white underbelly and icy blue eyes, formerly a rogue named Hawk. He is the son of Tigerstar and Sasha, the brother of Mothwing and Tadpole and the half brother of Brambleclaw and Tawnypelt. He apparently has six nieces and nephews: Dawnpelt, Flametail, Tigerheart, Lionblaze, Jayfeather, and Hollyleaf. However, this was proved wrong throughout the course of the Power Of Three series, as Brambleclaw was revealed to not be either Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, or Jayfeather's father. Hawkfrost was mentored by Leopardstar.
In Starlight, Hawkfrost sided with Mudclaw of WindClan and some ShadowClan warriors and led a rebellion against Onewhisker to kill him when he still had only one life. When he saw Mudclaw being killed by a falling tree, he apologized to StarClan for his actions. In Twilight, his relationship with Brambleclaw becomes closer and Squirrelfight doesn't like this because she doesn't trust Hawkfrost. When Mistyfoot came back to RiverClan from being captured by Twolegs, Hawkfrost was forced to let Mistyfoot become deputy again (he was deputy while she was gone). Once Mistyfoot took her place again, he started to insult her by saying that she's a traitor and that she's not fit to be a deputy. He ordered Brambleclaw to kill Firestar when he was trapped, but Brambleclaw decides he is loyal to ThunderClan and frees his leader. Hawkfrost lunged at him, trying to kill Firestar himself but Brambleclaw drove the stick that held the trap into Hawkfrost's throat, killing him but not before Hawkfrost revealed that he had help from a ThunderClan cat for trapping Firestar, who was later revealed as Ashfur.
Like Tigerstar, Hawkfrost was denied access to StarClan and now walks the Dark Forest/Place of No Stars with his father, and is responsible for helping to train Lionblaze in visions as a warrior.
Hawkfrost is Tigerstar and Sasha's son. His littermates are Mothwing and Tadpole. He is half-brother to Brambleclaw and Tawnypelt. Hawkfrost is nephew to Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters). He is grandson to Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents), great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother) and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents). He is grandnephew to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings) and kin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Honeyfern and Molepaw (Sorreltail's kits). As his two great-grandmothers are direct descendants to SkyClan (Cloudstar and Birdflight having Gorseclaw and Spottedpelt as kits), Hawkfrost is part-SkyClan, and part-rogue, although he is regards himself as a member of his adopted Clan first and foremost.
Hawkfrost once faked a sign from StarClan to make his sister Mothwing a medicine cat apprentice. Also, he made Mothwing fake other signs for his advantage.


==== Mothwing ====
Mothwing, a beautiful dappled golden tabby she-cat with amber eyes, and is the current RiverClan medicine cat and formerly a rogue named Moth. She is the daughter of Tigerstar and Sasha, a rogue cat, the littermate of Hawkfrost and Tadpole, and half-sister to Brambleclaw and Tawnypelt.
She originally was a warrior, but when Mudfur found a moth's wing outside the medicine cat den, he interpreted it as a sign that Mothwing should be his apprentice. It is later revealed that Hawkfrost had actually put it there without Mothwing's initial knowledge in order to help himself in his plan to gain power within his Clan. After he revealed the truth to Mothwing, her faith in StarClan was destroyed. However, Leafpool, Mistystar, Willowshine, and Jayfeather are the only cats to know this. When she first joined the Clan, she, along with Hawkfrost, had trouble being accepted into RiverClan because their mother was a rogue and their father was Tigerstar. Though she does not have faith in StarClan, a vital requirement for a medicine cat, StarClan have let her remain a medicine cat because they have seen how hard she has studied and trained for this role and for clear her devotion to her Clan. She has mentored one medicine cat apprentice, Willowshine.
As her two great-grandmothers are direct descendants to SkyClan (Cloudstar and Birdflight having Gorseclaw and Spottedpelt as kits), Mothwing and her brother, Hawkfrost, are part-SkyClan, part-rogue (Sasha) and part-ThunderClan (Tigerstar), although Mothwing is very loyal to RiverClan, her adopted Clan. Mothwing is half-aunt to Tigerheart, Dawnpelt and Flametail (Tawnypelt's kits); niece to Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters); granddaughter to Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents); great-granddaughter to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother) and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents); grandniece to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings), and kin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Honeyfern, Molepaw, Lilykit, and Seedkit (Sorreltail's kits); Molepaw and Cherrypaw (Poppyfrost's kits).


==== Reedwhisker ====
Reedwhisker is a black tom, with small, neat ears. He is first introduced in Moonrise, when Leafpaw saves him from drowning in a river. He later appears in Twilight, thanking Leafpool for saving his life.
In the Ultimate Leaders Election on the Warriors webpage, the Clan cats have an election; saying whether they want Firestar to lead them all (temporarily), or not. Reedwhisker votes for Firestar, saying "You saved my life once before, in the flood. I believe you can do it again", suggesting that he was one of Mistyfoot's kits, that was washed away in the flood to later be rescued by Fireheart and Graystripe. This was confirmed in a webchat with Erin Hunter. This would mean, however, that he has been an apprentice longer than most other cats, since both Feathertail and Stormfur, who are several months younger, earn their Warrior names before he does.
Reedwhisker is Mistystar's son. He is uncle to Sneezepaw and Mallowpaw, nephew to Stonefur and Mosskit (Mistyfoot's siblings). He's grandson to Bluestar and Oakheart (Mistyfoot's parents), great-grandson to Moonflower and Stormtail (Bluestar's parents) and Lilystem (a.k.a. Rainflower, Oakheart's mother). He's great-grandnephew to Goosefeather (Moonflower's brother), grandnephew to Crookedstar (Oakheart's brother) and kin to Silverstream (Crookedstar's daughter), Feathertail and Stormfur (Silverstream's kits). He is currently deputy of RiverClan.


=== The Power Of Three ===


==== Willowshine ====
Willowshine is a gray tabby she-cat with blue eyes, first introduced in Twilight as Willowkit. When the RiverClan cats were suffering from the Twoleg poison, Willowkit saved Beechpaw's life, when she fished out some half-chewed yarrow out of his throat and otherwise assisting Mothwing and Leafpool. After that, she dreamed of becoming a medicine cat. She is mentioned in most Power of Three books, as she is one of Hollyleaf's best friends, and trains as a medicine cat apprentice alongside Jayfeather. She doesn't like Jayfeather as much, as he snapped at her on their first time meeting each other. She is one of RiverClan's two medicine cats (the other being Mothwing, her mentor) and receives her medicine cat name in Eclipse. Additionally, it appears that she knows about Mothwing's secret, that her own mentor does not believe in StarClan. However, she has agreed not to tell the Clan, as she sees that Mothwing is a wonderful medicine cat on her own. She also had a few quarrels with Jayfeather when they were first apprentices, due to Jaypaw's sharp tongue.


=== Minor RiverClan Characters ===
The following are RiverClan characters introduced or appearing in the Warriors novel series, having small, less significant, and/or single instances in the story.


== WindClan ==
WindClan cats live on a territory located on the open moors in the plains north of the forest. As such, WindClan cats are known for their speed and endurance, a skill that is imperative for hunting their main source of prey, rabbits. WindClan have been driven off their territory by ShadowClan by the time Firepaw enters the forest, but are soon brought back with the aid of Fireheart and Graystripe. WindClan are forced to deal with attacks from both ShadowClan and RiverClan throughout the series, since they are seen as being the weakest Clan. As a result, WindClan often allies itself with ThunderClan, a recurring relationship that has further repercussions in later series.
WindClan, along with the other Clans, undergoes a dramatic shift in territory during the course of The New Prophecy series. During the time that Crowpaw and the others are on their journey, much of WindClan's territory is destroyed as the Twolegs proceed with their deforestation of the area. Eventually, WindClan and the other Clans are able to relocate to the lake territory, the WindClan camp of which is an area much resembling their old territory: wide-open hills and moors. Their territory is between ThunderClan's and RiverClan's. A Twoleg horseplace (horse ranch) is located nearby, and occasionally dogs living there are set loose and chase the WindClan cats. The open hills give the greatest view of the surrounding area, and a WindClan cat is typically positioned on top of one of them as a lookout, able to detect threats much more quickly than in the forests. WindClan undergo a rather stressful period in leadership when Tallstar, their leader for the entirety of the series until this point, dies of old age and changes his successor from Mudclaw to Onewhisker at the last minute.
By the time of the Power of Three series, WindClan have resolved to become completely hostile towards ThunderClan as a result of their being viewed as ThunderClan's "puppets" in the past. Onestar, once a warm and thoughtful friend of Firestar's has completely withdrawn his previous relationship with the ThunderClan leader. WindClan cats often hunt prey near and over ThunderClan's borders, the reasoning being that ThunderClan is stretched too thin to defend itself. This attitude climaxes in Eclipse, when the entirety of WindClan sneak into ThunderClan's camp to start the largest battle ever conceived in the history of the series.


=== Bluestar's Prophecy ===
Bluestar's Prophecy is a super-edition which was about the time from Bluestar was a kit to when she became leader and her death scene.


=== Heatherstar ===
Heatherstar is a pinkish-gray she-cat with blue eyes. She was leader when ThunderClan attacked WindClan and accused ThunderClan for their unjust act. She chose Talltail as WindClan's deputy, who soon became Tallstar. Near the end of Tallstar's Revenge, she dies of greencough, a respiratory infection.


==== Hawkheart ====
Hawkheart is a mottled dark brown tom with yellow eyes. He was once a fierce WindClan warrior but StarClan chose him to become a medicine cat. He killed Moonflower, Bluestar's mother, when Moonflower tried to destroy WindClan's herbs and threatened Bluepaw when she was in the camp.


=== Warriors (Original Series) ===
The original series covers events in the story from Into the Wild to The Darkest Hour. Many characters mentioned here were introduced in the original series, but play minor or significant roles in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series as well.


==== Onestar ====
Onestar, a small, mottled-brown tabby tom, is the current leader of WindClan. When Fireheart and Graystripe brought WindClan home in Fire and Ice, Onewhisker, became close friends with Fireheart and still retained this friendship even when WindClan were angry with ThunderClan for sheltering Brokentail. In The Darkest Hour, in the battle with BloodClan, Onewhisker was nearly killed by the BloodClan leader, Scourge, if not for Firestar saving him. Later, in Starlight, Tallstar appoints Onewhisker deputy on the brink of death, which meant that Onestar was now the leader of WindClan, though Tallstar didn't use the right words for appointing a deputy. At first Onestar is very timid about his new position, but after he receives his nine lives and name from StarClan, he becomes more confident and realizes that there can be no more friendship between WindClan and ThunderClan, and WindClan must prove itself capable of taking care of itself without help from others. He then assumes a more leader-like attitude and abandons his close friendship with Firestar. Rock states in Cats of the Clans that Onestar knows more than any other cat in the Clans about the loneliness that power brings and that he misses Firestar. He mentored Whitetail and Gorsepaw.


==== Tallstar ====
Tallstar, a black and white tom with a long tail and amber eyes, was the leader of WindClan before Onestar. Tallstar and his Clan were chased off from their territory by ShadowClan under Brokenstar's rule until Fireheart and Graystripe brought them back. WindClan began a friendship with ThunderClan afterwards as a result of this, although it faltered when Tallstar became furious with ThunderClan for sheltering Brokentail, the cat who drove them out of their territory. When Bluestar suspects WindClan of allegedly stealing prey, Fireheart seeks Tallstar to talk with Bluestar in peace. In The Darkest Hour, when Tigerstar announces joining all four Clans and territories into a single alliance, Tallstar and Firestar both reject his offer. After BloodClan attacks, Tallstar and Firestar agree to fight them with the other Clans in a temporary alliance, called LionClan. Tallstar loses his last life in Starlight with Onewhisker and Firestar at his side, making him the only cat to have served as a Clan leader throughout the entire original series. He switched the deputy from Mudclaw to Onewhisker on his deathbed, fearing that Mudclaw was not the right cat to lead WindClan after his death. He mentors Morningflower and Deadfoot. His warrior name was Talltail. He is born Tallkit, but another kit, a tom named Shrewkit, calls him Wormkit because of his expected destiny of digging tunnels. Both his mother and father (Palebird and Sandgorse) want him to be a tunneler, but Tallkit wishes to be a moor-runner, free to run and catch prey out on the open moors. Heatherstar, the leader of WindClan in Tallkit's days, recognizes his eagerness to run and apprentices him to be a moor-runner. Sandgorse is especially displeased, but does not do anything about it. When Sandgorse dies in a tunnel collapse apparently due to the actions of a loner named Sparrow, Tallpaw swears vengeance upon him.


==== Deadfoot ====
Deadfoot, a black cat with a crooked front paw, was the former deputy of WindClan under Tallstar, and was deputy when ShadowClan chased them out of their territory. Like Onewhisker, Deadfoot became friends with Fireheart when he and Graystripe brought WindClan home. Deadfoot wasn't seen alive after The Darkest Hour. He appears in StarClan as the cat who chooses Crowpaw (his son) (later Crowfeather) to go on the journey to the sun-drown place. Victoria Holmes confirmed that he died in the battle with BloodClan. He was the mate of Ashfoot and was the father of Crowfeather and Eaglekit.


==== Wind ====
Wind was a fast, sandy colored she-cat that became WindClan's founding leader, along with Shadow, River, and Thunder. She was said to be the fastest cat in the forest, and according to the WindClan cats, when she joined StarClan she scooped out a pawful of sand in the forest territories, making a hollow for her Clan to live in. In Dawn of the Clans, her warrior name was revealed to be Wind Runner. Some of her descendants, such as Crowfeather and Breezepelt, still live in WindClan currently.


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The New Prophecy series covers events in the story from Midnight to Sunset. Many characters here were first mentioned in the original series, but had minor or insignificant roles. In addition, as with the original series, most characters listed here play minor or significant roles in the following series, Power of Three, as well.


==== Crowfeather ====
Crowfeather is a muscular, smoky gray, almost black tom with blue eyes, first introduced in Midnight as an apprentice, Crowpaw. He was chosen to be the WindClan representative on the journey to the sun-drown-place. Fiercely loyal to his Clan and sharp-tongued, he found it hard to make friends with the other cats on the journey. Amazingly, he got along best with Feathertail, and they both grew to love each other over the course of the journey. However, she died killing the mountain cat Sharptooth to save his life and the Tribe of Rushing Water. This only increased his hostility toward the other cats and made him feel utterly alone. He chose his warrior name based on her to honor her memory.
Not long after they reached their new home, his bad luck continued and he took another hard fall for Leafpool, the ThunderClan medicine cat. He revealed his affections in Starlight, when he saved Leafpool from falling to her death. It has been revealed that his relationship with Feathertail was more like "highschool romance", and his relationship with Leafpool was the real thing. She returned his feelings and the two decided to meet on the border between their Clans, where a stream runs through. Eventually Leafpool's mentor, Cinderpelt, found out, and so the two ran away in order to be together. However, they weren't away for long before they returned and broke off their connections, as Midnight had told them about a plot her kin had made to destroy the Clans. Crowfeather moved on to mate with a she-cat named Nightcloud and had a son, Breezepelt. He is the father of Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Hollyleaf, with Leafpool being the mother. Crowfeather shows little affection to his mate and even less paternal love for his son although he is loyal to his Clan now, though there was one incident in The Sight when a den collapsed on Breezepelt and Lionblaze, and Crowfeather seemed very worried for his son's life. Crowfeather even states that Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, and Jayfeather mean nothing to him in Sunrise. Crowfeather has also appeared in Outcast, when he and his son joined the cats from the sun-drown-place journey to aid the Tribe of Rushing Water in an intruder attack.
Crowfeather is the son of Deadfoot and Ashfoot, and the brother of Eaglekit (as revealed in Secrets of the Clans). He has mentored Heathertail, and was mentored by Mudclaw. He has fathered four kits: Breezepelt (WindClan); Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, Jayfeather (ThunderClan). He also has a sharp tongue and has passed that down to Breezepelt and Jayfeather, and in Secrets of the Clans, it is revealed that Crowfeather is kin of WindClan's first two leaders, Wind and Gorsestar.


==== Mudclaw ====
Mudclaw, a mottled dark brown tom, is a WindClan warrior introduced in Fire and Ice of the original series, and is the WindClan deputy from Firestar's Quest to Starlight. Typically, he is hostile and easy to anger. He routinely attacks cats he finds on WindClan territory without asking for explanations first. Mudclaw is the leader of the patrol that prevents Bluestar from reaching Highstones in Rising Storm, causing her to renounce faith in and declare war on StarClan. Fiercely loyal to WindClan and highly aggressive to all other cats, Mudclaw was appointed deputy of WindClan after the death of Deadfoot. As The New Prophecy series continues, Tallstar continues to grow more ill and Mudclaw takes over many of his duties, often acting as a secondary leader.
When Tallstar is about to die, he abruptly replaces Mudclaw with Onewhisker as deputy, thus effectively revoking Mudclaw's right to become leader. His reasons for doing so involve Mudclaw's hostile demeanor, which he fears would lead WindClan into a state of chaos. Mudclaw is outraged by this and conspires with Hawkfrost of RiverClan in order to overthrow Onewhisker and take back the position he believes is rightfully his. Before his plan can succeed, however, Brambleclaw and a number of ThunderClan cats interfere, resulting in Mudclaw being crushed by a falling tree. The tree now serves as a bridge to an island where the Clans now have Gatherings. Mudclaw does not reside in the Dark Forest/Place of No Stars with Tigerstar, Darkstripe, and Hawkfrost as a result of his revolt, as he truly felt he was doing the right thing.
Mudclaw has mentored Crowfeather and Webfoot.


=== Power of Three Series ===
The Power of Three series covers events in the story from The Sight to Sunrise.


==== Heathertail ====
A pretty, well-mannered light brown tabby WindClan she-cat with stunning heather-colored eyes, Heathertail develops a close friendship with Lionblaze during The Sight and Dark River. Heathertail discovers a series of secret underground tunnels connecting WindClan and ThunderClan's territories and shares this knowledge with Lionblaze. The two then begin to meet each other during the night in the tunnels, pretending to be members of the fictional DarkClan, of which Heathertail is the leader. These meetings eventually take a toll on both cats' daily lives, and Heathertail is hurt when Lionblaze decides that they must put their respective Clans first and that their relationship can no longer continue. Heathertail's relationship with Lionblaze is further strained in Eclipse when Lionblaze, in a bloodlust caused from the Clan-wide battle started by WindClan, where he accuses her of betraying the secret of the tunnels to her Clanmates. Heathertail denies this, but Lionblaze does not believe her and vows to forever be her enemy, thus shattering their friendship. Lionblaze might have realized what he has done, but when he attempted to speak with Heathertail and possibly say he was sorry, she acted as if she didn't want to be near him. In a Wands and World chat it is revealed that she feels no affection toward Breezepelt, and still loves Lionblaze. Crowfeather was her mentor. In another Wands and Worlds chat, one fan asked if Heathertail would make any significant appearances in the coming books. This was confirmed by Erin Hunter. In an Erin Hunter chat, it was revealed that Heathertail did not tell WindClan about the tunnels and that the kits who got lost in the tunnels did.
In Long Shadows of the Power of Three series, Lionblaze takes catmint from WindClan territory to treat a large breakout of greencough. Heathertail confronts him, reminding him to not become a bully like his kin Tigerstar. She also suspects that Jayfeather killed Dawnpelt. Her parents are Onestar and Whitetail. She was once mistakenly attributed with having blue eyes.


==== Breezepelt ====
A black tom with amber eyes, Breezepelt, the son of Crowfeather and Nightcloud, is a headstrong WindClan warrior first introduced as an apprentice, Breezepaw, in The Sight. He often makes tactless remarks and is not afraid to voice his negative opinions. He has been shown to panic during times of crisis, and is quick to argue. Despite his grumpy demeanor, Breezepelt has been known to cooperate on a few occasions, losing his hostile attitude almost completely in favor of the task at hand. In Outcast, he joins his father and the other Clan cats on the journey to the Tribe of Rushing Water to aid them in defeating a group of intruders. It has been revealed that much of Breezepelt's errant behavior stems from a lack of support from his father, Crowfeather, who shows little regard for his well-being. Crowfeather's reasons for rejecting his son are most likely due to his past (and still ongoing) love interest in Leafpool. He is also half-brother to Hollyleaf, Jayfeather and Lionblaze, because they all have the same father: Crowfeather. Mentored by Whitetail. When it is revealed, he takes the fact his father has three kits in another Clan very badly. In The Fourth Apprenctice, he follows Poppyfrost to the Moonpool. He threatens to kill her when Jayfeather shows up, stating that he hates his half-siblings and would never forgive them for what their mother did. Ignoring Jayfeather's pleas, he attacks the two ThunderClan cats. Poppyfrost, who is pregnant, is unable to fight him off, so Jayfeather is forced to fight his half-brother himself, along with Honeyfern, who helps Jayfeather, and Brokenstar, who helps Breezepelt. It is revealed that he is being trained by Dark Forest, and is part of the battle between StarClan and the Dark Forest. During the Great Battle, his father, Crowfeather stops him from killing Lionblaze.


==== Nightcloud ====
A black she-cat, Nightcloud is introduced in The Sight as the mate of Crowfeather and the mother of their son, Breezepelt. Her relationship with Crowfeather is depicted as somewhat distant, as Crowfeather does not seem to have any genuine affection for her. Nightcloud is clearly aware of Crowfeather's past relationship with Leafpool and resents Leafpool for Crowfeather's ongoing affection for her, even though Leafpool is a medicine cat from another Clan and she can never love him. This implies that Crowfeather took Nightcloud as a mate only out of necessity in an attempt to either "move on", or, as Rock states in Cats of the Clans, to prove his loyalty to WindClan. Nightcloud cherishes her son, Breezepelt, and is shown to be angered by Crowfeather's lack of affection for him. Later on in Sunrise, she gets furious when Hollyleaf says Crowfeather is also mates with Leafpool.


=== Minor WindClan Characters ===
The following are WindClan characters introduced or appearing in the Warriors novel series, having small, less significant, and/or single instances in the story.


== ShadowClan ==
ShadowClan territory is mainly in a giant collection of swamps and bogs and thick wet grass covered in thick pine trees, giving the area a dark and gloomy feel. ShadowClan cats are skilled at hunting and navigating in near-complete darkness, because the night is when their main sources of prey are active. Along with lizards, frogs, and small forest animals, such as voles, ShadowClan also occasionally catch rats who reside in the nearby Carrionplace (garbage dump); however, they must be careful when eating these rats as they occasionally carry harmful diseases. ShadowClan are often depicted as the primary antagonists of the series, and as such many of their individual members are rude and hostile. However, many ShadowClan cats are completely and blindly devoted to their leader; since a number of ShadowClan's leaders have been truly villainous, the actions of their followers have expectedly followed suit. It says in the books that some cats say that ShadowClan cats are so mean because the cold wind in their territory supposedly chills their hearts.
ShadowClan, along with the other Clans, undergoes a dramatic shift in territory during the course of The New Prophecy series. During the time that Tawnypelt and the others are on their journey, much of ShadowClan's territory is destroyed as the Twolegs proceed with their deforestation of the area. Eventually ShadowClan and the other Clans are able to relocate to the lake territory, the ShadowClan camp of which is located in a dense pine forest. Though not quite the same as the marshes they used to inhabit, the thickness of the forest often shrouds the territory in gloom and darkness, perfectly suited for ShadowClan's stealth prowess. The area is not very suitable for prey, however, resulting in ShadowClan inhabiting the least desirable territory once again. Despite their bad luck, they manage to feed themselves decently enough (a testament to the tenacity of ShadowClan warriors). The forest's primary hazard is a Twoleg house on the northern fringes of ShadowClan's territory, home to two rather violent kittypets who often attack Clan cats who stray too close and call their Twolegs to fend off patrols. ThunderClan assists in telling these two cats to leave the Clan cats alone in Twilight.


=== Warriors (original series) ===
The original series covers events in the story from Into the Wild to The Darkest Hour. Many characters mentioned here were introduced in the original series, but may play minor or significant roles in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series as well.


==== Boulder ====
Boulder, a skinny silver tabby tom with a ragged ear and bright watchful eyes, is a former member of BloodClan and a member of ShadowClan. In the book Cats of the Clans, he was actually invited to join ShadowClan, inspired by the hunting patrols and battles, he decided to leave BloodClan and join ShadowClan. He was one of the few cats who were chased out of ThunderClan territory by Firepaw and Yellowfang. When Tigerclaw became leader, Boulder and Blackfoot came back to ShadowClan. In The Darkest Hour, Boulder brought Tigerstar to BloodClan to meet its leader Scourge. Boulder revealed to Firestar that after Tigerstar was killed, BloodClan attacked their Clan and some ShadowClan warriors had joined them. In the end, Boulder fought alongside LionClan to defeat BloodClan. After the battle, Boulder lived in ShadowClan as an elder throughout the second series and died of greencough sometime between Sunset and The Sight.


==== Blackstar ====
Blackstar, a large white tom with jet-black paws and ears and amber eyes, was ShadowClan's deputy, Blackfoot, when Brokenstar was leader and is now the current ShadowClan leader. He was first introduced in Into the Wild. He was one of Brokenstar's followers and killed one of ThunderClan's elders, Rosetail, in an attempt to steal their kits, but was fought off by Yellowfang. Blackfoot, along with Brokenstar, Clawface and Boulder, were chased out of their territory. Blackfoot lived as a rogue with Brokenstar and attacked the ThunderClan camp under his command. When Tigerstar became leader of ShadowClan, Blackfoot was appointed deputy again. In TigerClan, Blackfoot helped Darkstripe kill Stonefur because he was a half-Clan cat, causing Firestar to view him as untrustworthy, even when he agreed to fight on their side with LionClan. After the battle with BloodClan, he announced that he would prepare for his journey to Highstones to receive his nine lives and his new name, as he was now leader of ShadowClan due to Tigerstar's death. He is introduced as a leader in Firestar's Quest. In Outcast, Blackstar seems to lose some hostility towards ThunderClan, as he reminisces with Firestar about the old forest after two ThunderClan warriors were found in ShadowClan territory.
Blackstar begins to lose faith in StarClan in Eclipse, however, after a strange cat named Sol comes to live with ShadowClan and questions StarClan's existence and power, leading Blackstar to lose faith in them, to the point of changing his name back to Blackfoot. This changes in Long Shadows, however, when Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, Jayfeather, and three ShadowClan apprentices fake a sign from StarClan to restore Blackstar's faith in his warrior ancestors. Real StarClan warriors (Raggedstar and Runningnose) appear to complete the sign, and Blackstar and ShadowClan begin to believe in StarClan again, later driving Sol out of the Clan. Blackstar has mentored Tallpoppy. During the battle in The Last Hope, Blackstar kills Redwillow for training in the Dark Forest and later loses a life due to an attack on the ShadowClan camp, but quickly recovers and thanks Firestar for his help in back-up warriors.
In Bramblestar's Storm, he dies as a result of a flood, making Rowanclaw leader.


==== Brokenstar ====
Brokenstar is a huge long-furred, dark brown tabby tom with bright amber eyes, torn ears, a broad, flat face, a battle-scarred muzzle, and a tail that is bent in the middle like a broken branch. He was the former leader of ShadowClan before Nightstar and is depicted somewhat as the primary antagonist of Into the Wild. He was a cruel cat who turned kits into apprentices three moons too soon, which in turn led to their deaths. He was the son of Raggedstar and Yellowfang, but didn't know that the latter was his mother, who bore him and two she-kits (who died) in secret. He was given to an ambitious queen named Lizardstripe to be fostered instead. Lizardstripe would not accept Brokentail in her den when he was a kit, purely because he had a crooked tail. Brokentail grew into a great warrior and eventually became deputy, but he murdered his own father, Raggedstar, so that he could become leader and exiled Yellowfang from ShadowClan, falsely accusing her of murdering two apprentices that he himself killed by forcing them into warrior training too soon. This banishment led to Yellowfang's acceptance into ThunderClan. In Into The Wild, when Brokenstar is first introduced, Yellowfang and Firepaw drove Brokenstar and his supporters out of ShadowClan in a revolt. Brokentail lived as a rogue in Fire and Ice, and attacked the ThunderClan camp in an attempt to kill Fireheart but was blinded by Yellowfang. He was then taken prisoner and stripped of his leadership status, renamed to his old warrior name of Brokentail. He plotted with Tigerclaw in Forest of Secrets to attack ThunderClan along with his rogue allies, though the attack failed. When the rogues were chased out and Tigerclaw was exiled, Yellowfang decided to end Brokentail's life by feeding him deathberries, also revealing to him that she was really his mother. Later, in Sunset, he is implied to be in the Dark Forest/Place of No Stars with Tigerstar, Hawkfrost, and Darkstripe after the latter scents him.
Brokenstar mentored Mosspaw and Volepaw (who both died before becoming warriors) despite their being only three moons old.
Brokentail may have made an appearance in The Rise of Scourge, when Scourge scents a forest cat, believing that he's Tigerstar. Instead, a tom with a bent tail and two rogue friends are found, with the latter calling him "boss". After one is killed, the tom with the bent tail states, "I've had my fill of this place. It's time to return to the forest... where we belong."
He has also made an appearance in The Fourth Apprentice where he attacks Jayfeather along with Breezepelt as a "ghost cat". They were both driven off by Honeyfern before they could kill him or Poppyfrost. He, along with Tigerstar and Hawkfrost, watch over Poppyfrost's kits greedily at the end of the book. He also makes Ivypool attempt to kill Flametail, before Tigerheart stops her and Tigerstar agrees with Tigerheart.
He appears again in The Last Hope where he and the other Dark Forest cats invade the ThunderClan camp. During the battle he kills Ferncloud who was guarding the nursery before being killed by Yellowfang a second time causing him to die and fade away forever.


==== Nightstar ====
Nightstar, a lean, but frail, black tom with amber eyes and a long tail, was the leader of ShadowClan before Tigerstar. After Brokenstar was driven out of ShadowClan in Into the Wild, Nightpelt, one of the Clan's senior warriors, offered to take leadership of ShadowClan and appointed Cinderfur as his deputy. However, in Rising Storm, he became violently ill due to the sickness from Carrionplace raging through the ShadowClan camp at the time and died, though he apparently had nine lives to spare. Runningnose, ShadowClan's medicine cat at the time, later told Fireheart that Nightstar had never actually received his nine lives when he first journeyed to the Moonstone, perhaps due to the fact that Brokentail, ex-leader of ShadowClan, was still alive and remained ShadowClan's leader in the eyes of StarClan. Following Brokentail's death, Nightstar was too weak to travel back to the Moonstone and died sometime in Rising Storm, shortly after his deputy Cinderfur died, thus allowing Tigerclaw to take control of ShadowClan. Nightpelt has mentored Dawncloud.


=== Tigerstar ===
Tigerstar (born Tigerkit) is a dark brown tabby tom with a torn ear and amber eyes. He is born in ThunderClan, son of Pinestar and Leopardfoot, but is exiled for attempting to murder Bluestar, the former leader of ThunderClan. Before he is exiled, he accuses his apprentice, Ravenpaw, of treason, and mates with Goldenflower, a ThunderClan she-cat. They have two kits, Tawnykit (later Tawnypelt) and Bramblekit (later Bramblestar). He then retreats with sworn vengeance on ThunderClan. He reappears in ShadowClan as Tigerstar. At the time, Shadowclan is in need of a strong leader; they are in chaos because of the sudden death of Nightstar, the leader who never receives the traditional nine lives from StarClan. Tigerstar is more than willing to lead them. He brings rogues to the Clan, and when his cats question his leadership, Tigerstar meets it with violence and ferocity. He spends the rest of his life plotting against Fireheart, and one of his plans includes leading dogs directly into the ThunderClan camp. Bluestar is killed while saving Firestar. Since he is deputy before she dies, he becomes Firestar, leader of ThunderClan. Before Tigerstar dies at the claws of Scourge, a vicious cat and the leader of BloodClan, he becomes mates with a loner named Sasha. They have three kits, Tadpole, Hawk (later Hawkkit, then Hawkfrost), and Moth (later Mothkit, then Mothwing). Tadpole dies, drowning in a basement flood. Instead of going to StarClan, Tigerstar is sent to the Place of No Stars. There he still plans his revenge on Firestar. In the end, in The Last Hope, he is killed by Firestar.


==== Shadow ====
Shadow was a rogue that became ShadowClan's founding leader. She was an independent thick-furred black she-cat with green eyes that, and it is said in Secrets of the Clans that she was untrusting of her Clanmates and spent her life complaining about her decision to lead ShadowClan. However, in the series Dawn of the Clans, Shadow's warrior name is Tall Shadow and she is revealed to be a wise leader. Tall Shadow was originally the leader of the moor cats until her brother, Moon Shadow, dies in a forest fire. Grief-stricken, she gave up her leader ship to Gray Wing. After the Great Battle, she took some cats over the Thunderpath (road) and started ShadowClan. She was the first of the founding leaders to die, in a battle she had started with other Clans.


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The New Prophecy series covers events in the story from Midnight to Sunset. Many characters here were first mentioned in the original series, but had minor or insignificant roles. In addition, as with the original series, most characters listed here play minor or significant roles in the following series, Power of Three, as well.


==== Tawnypelt ====
A slender, mottled, dark tortoiseshell she-cat with green eyes and well-muscled shoulders (though as a kit she was listed as a golden tabby), Tawnypelt is the daughter of Goldenflower and Tigerstar, as well as the littermate of Brambleclaw and half-sister of Hawkfrost, Mothwing, Tadpole and Swiftpaw. When she lived in ThunderClan as an apprentice, Tawnypaw, most of her Clanmates did not trust her because her father was Tigerstar, so instead of putting up with their suspicions, she left ThunderClan to join ShadowClan, then part of an alliance under Tigerstar's rule called TigerClan, in The Darkest Hour. She became a loyal ShadowClan warrior, though some of her Clanmates still doubt her allegiances because she was born in ThunderClan. Her full warrior name is revealed in Firestar's Quest. In Midnight, she is chosen as the ShadowClan representative on the quest to find a new home for the Clans. Coincidentally, her brother, Brambleclaw, is also chosen, as the ThunderClan representative.
Tigerstar offered her the same plan of power he offered to her brothers, Hawkfrost and Brambleclaw, to make her leader of ShadowClan, but she rejected him, saying that if she were ever to become leader, it would be through honesty and loyalty. In the Power of Three series, she mates with Rowanclaw to have three kits: Dawnkit, Tigerkit and Flamekit.
She goes with her brother, Brambleclaw, Squirrelflight, Stormfur, Brook, Crowfeather and his son Breezepaw, Hollypaw, Jaypaw, and Lionpaw in Outcast to help the Tribe of Rushing Water deal with a group of rogues that have invaded their territory. In Long Shadows, Tawnypelt and her kits leave ShadowClan temporarily and go to ThunderClan after Blackstar loses faith and denounces StarClan. Tawnypelt is tough and stands for nothing from no one, but has an affectionate side that comes through when her friends need her.
She was mentored by Brackenfur in ThunderClan and Oakfur in ShadowClan. Tawnypelt's also niece to Lionheart (Goldenflower's brother), Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters). She's granddaughter to Speckletail (Goldenflower's mother), Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents). She's also great-granddaughter to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother) and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents), grandniece to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings) and kin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Poppyfrost, Cinderheart, Molepaw, Lilykit, Seedkit and Honeyfern (Sorreltail's kits). As her two great-grandmothers, Sweetbriar and Swiftbreeze, are direct descendants to SkyClan, Tawnypelt is part-SkyClan and part-ThunderClan.


=== Power of Three ===
The Power of Three series covers events in the story from The Sight to Sunrise.


==== Tigerheart ====
The son of Tawnypelt and Rowanclaw and the brother of Dawnpelt and Flametail, Tigerheart is a handsome, sleek dark brown Tabby Tom with blue eyes, and straight, thick whiskers. He is the grandson of Tigerstar, whom he is named after. While resembling the latter, he is very cheerful, and kind. He is first introduced as a Kit, Tigerkit, in Dark River and later as an apprentice in Long Shadows. He has a relationship with a ThunderClan apprentice. He is the best hunter out of his siblings. In Long Shadows, Tigerheart, along with his siblings and Tawnypelt, leave ShadowClan temporarily for ThunderClan after ShadowClan loses its faith in StarClan. He also helps Lionblaze, Hollyleaf and Jayfeather to convince Blackstar to believe that StarClan still watch over them by creating a fake StarClan sign. Tigerheart had the same mentors that his mother Tawnypelt did, both when she was in ThunderClan and ShadowClan. He was temporarily mentored by Brackenfur, while staying in ThunderClan and was mentored by Oakfur when he returned to ShadowClan. In The Fourth Apprentice, there are hints about him having a crush on Dovepaw, Lionblaze's apprentice. This is confirmed in Night Whispers, when the two of them admitted their feelings for each other. It is also hinted that Tigerheart is possibly being trained by the Dark Forest cats in Fading Echoes. This is also confirmed in Night Whispers. In Sign of the Moon and The Forgotten Warrior, Tigerheart's affection for Dovewing fades away and he starts to avoid her. Tigerheart is also the nephew to Brambleclaw (Tawnypelt's brother), half-nephew to Hawkfrost and Mothwing (Tawnypelt's half-siblings). He is the grandson to Goldenflower and Tigerstar (Tawnypelt's parents). He is also the grand-nephew to Lionheart and Snowkit (Goldenflower's brothers), Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters). Tigerheart is the great-grandson to Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents) and Speckletail (Goldenflower's mother); he is great-great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother), and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents), great-grand-nephew to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings) and kin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart and Molepaw (Sorreltail's Kits). As his two great-great-grandmothers, Sweetbriar and Swiftbreeze, are direct descendants to SkyClan, Tigerheart is part-SkyClan, part-ShadowClan and part-ThunderClan.


==== Flametail ====
The second son of Tawnypelt and Rowanclaw, and the brother of Dawnpelt and Tigerheart, Flametail has a bright ginger pelt like his father and faded light green eyes, thick fur, a bushy tail, and short, pudgy legs. He dreams of becoming a medicine cat under Littlecloud instead of a warrior, probably based on his bond with Jayfeather and curiosity. He was first introduced as a kit, Flamekit, in Outcast, and as an apprentice in Long Shadows. In Long Shadows he leaves ShadowClan for ThunderClan with his siblings and Tawnypelt after ShadowClan loses faith in StarClan, and also helps create the fake StarClan sign. He was temporarily mentored by Cloudtail while staying in ThunderClan, and is being trained to be a medicine cat in Sunrise by Littlecloud. Flamepaw's medicine cat name will be Flametail. Flametail died when he drowned in the frozen lake in Night Whispers. His sister Dawnpelt thinks that Jayfeather is the one who drowns him, but it is because of Rock, an ancient cat, that Jayfeather is not able to save Flametail.
Flametail's also nephew to Brambleclaw (Tawnypelt's brother), half-nephew to Hawkfrost, Mothwing and Tadpole (Tawnypelt's half-siblings), grandson to Goldenflower and Tigerstar (Tawnypelt's parents), grandnephew to Lionheart and Snowkit (Goldenflower's brothers), Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters), great-grandson to Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents) and Speckletail and Smallear (Goldenflower's parents), great-great-grandson to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother), and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents), great-grandnephew to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings) and kin to Graystipe and Longtail (Patchpelt's kits) Sandstorm (Redtail's daughter), Rainwhisker, Sootfur and Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Feathertail, Stormfur, Briarlight, Bumblestripe, and Blossomfall (Graystripe's kits) Leafpool and Squirrelflight (Sandstorm's kits), Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze (Leafpool's kits), Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine) (Stormfur's kits), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart, Lilykit, Seedkit and Molepaw (Sorreltail's kits), Molepaw and Cherrypaw (Poppyfrost's kits). As his two great-great-grandmothers are direct descendants to SkyClan, Flametail is part-SkyClan, part-ShadowClan and part-ThunderClan.


==== Dawnpelt ====
The only daughter of Tawnypelt and Rowanclaw and the sister of Flametail and Tigerheart, Dawnpelt has a creamy pelt and a fiery personality much like her mother, and seems to be closer to Hollyleaf than her other apparent cousins, Lionblaze and Jayfeather, and is the best fighter out of her siblings. She was first introduced as a kit, Dawnkit, in Outcast, and as an apprentice in Long Shadows. She left ShadowClan for ThunderClan with her mother and littermates after it lost faith in StarClan, and helped to create the fake StarClan sign. She was temporarily mentored by Spiderleg when she stayed in ThunderClan. It is said that she is most likely going to be the best fighter among her siblings. Her mentor was revealed in Sunrise as Ivytail. In The Forgotten Warrior, she blames Jayfeather for killing Flametail.
Dawnpelt's also niece to Brambleclaw (Tawnypelt's brother), half-niece to Hawkfrost, Mothwing and Tadpole (Tawnypelt's half-siblings), granddaughter to Goldenflower and Tigerstar (Tawnypelt's parents), grandniece to Lionheart and Snowkit (Goldenflower's brothers), Mistkit and Nightkit (Tigerstar's sisters), great-granddaughter to Pinestar and Leopardfoot (Tigerstar's parents) and Speckletail (Goldenflower's mother), great-great-granddaughter to Sweetbriar (Pinestar's mother), and Swiftbreeze and Adderfang (Leopardfoot's parents), great-grandniece to Patchpelt, Redtail, Spottedleaf and Willowpelt (Leopardfoot's siblings) and kin to Rainwhisker, Sootfur, Sorreltail (Willowpelt's kits), Poppyfrost, Honeyfern, Cinderheart, Lilykit, Seedkit and Molepaw (Sorreltail's kits). As her two great-great-grandmothers, Sweetbriar and Swiftbreeze, are direct descendants to SkyClan, Dawnpelt is part-SkyClan, part-ShadowClan and part-ThunderClan.


=== Minor ShadowClan Characters ===
The following are ShadowClan characters introduced or appearing in the Warriors novel series, having small, less significant, and/or single instances in the story.


== SkyClan ==
SkyClan is the fifth Clan of the original forest territories, a fact that is unknown to all cats except for Firestar, Sandstorm, Graystripe, Cinderpelt, the new SkyClan, and StarClan. Their camp was located where the Twolegplace where Barley's farm currently sits and they have the unique ability to jump very high, a technique that has been passed on to some kittypets and rogues in the rocky canyon. SkyClan were driven out when their part of the forest was excavated to create Twolegplace. SkyClan's camp also spread over to where Firestar's friend, Smudge, lives. SkyClan appealed to the other Clans for help, but none of them wanted to redivide their territory and as such SkyClan was forced to leave the forest. They traveled north along the river before finally settling in a rocky canyon. Before long, however, an intelligent rat pack attacked and killed most of the Clan, forcing the remnants to scatter across the nearby forest and Twolegplaces.
Modern SkyClan was reformed when Firestar, with the help of Sandstorm, set out to reunite the lost descendants of the Clan throughout the nearby area. Later, after rebuilding the lost Clan, SkyClan was able to defeat the rat pack and live in peace for moons to come under leadership of Leafstar. SkyClan is still trying to make their clan larger since at the moment it is very small. SkyClan have warriors that are at the gorge in the morning but sleep with their human owners at night. These cats are called "Daylight warriors", but the warriors in the clan sometimes call them "Kitty warriors".


=== Current SkyClan ===


==== Leafstar ====
Leafstar, a brown and cream tabby she-cat with amber eyes, was a rogue named Leaf before she came to SkyClan. After she joined, Firestar gave her the warrior name of Leafdapple, and she mentored Sparrowpelt. StarClan later chose Leafdapple to be leader because of her thoughtful personality and understanding of the warrior code. Firestar at first doesn't feel comfortable with her being the leader, but he realizes how perceptive she is when she tells him that she knows his first loyalty is to his own Clan at home. During her leader ceremony, the ancient leaders of the four Clans come together to give her four of her nine lives as an apology to SkyClan for driving them out. Leafstar is also in love with Billystorm, a daylight-warrior, and they became mates. They have Firekit (named after Firestar), Stormkit (named after Sandstorm), and Harrykit (named after Sol's house cat name, Harry).


==== Sharpclaw ====
A dark ginger tabby tom with broad shoulders and green eyes. Sharpclaw was first a rogue named Scratch. After he joined SkyClan he received his warrior name Sharpclaw. He is interested when Firestar mentioned that leaders have 9 lives. He was a mentor to Cherrytail and is currently SkyClan's deputy. He tends to have a quick temper and sharp tongue. In the SkyClan manga, it is revealed that he has a crush on Cherrytail.


==== Echosong ====
A silver-gray tabby she-cat with tiny dark gray paws and green eyes and a white chest and a fluffy tail, Echosong was a former kittypet named Echo with no trace of SkyClan characteristics, but was given the role of SkyClan's medicine cat after she began to have dreams of the ancient SkyClan and StarClan. At first she was unsure of interpreting dreams from her warrior ancestors, but later grew into her role as a medicine cat. Later, Fawnstep, the medicine cat of SkyClan at the time of its exile, said she would be sharing dreams with her, implying that Fawnstep would be Echosong's mentor, in the way that Leafpool was Willowshine's mentor when Mothwing could not teach her about StarClan. She receives the vision that makes Leafstar leader.


==== Skywatcher ====
A scarred, very old, dark gray tom with matted fur and pale blue eyes, Skywatcher was also known as Moony. Skywatcher was an old cat who was the last true warrior of SkyClan, named Sky, until Firestar and Sandstorm rebuilt SkyClan. He was the one to show them around SkyClan territory. He died in his sleep, but Firestar believes that he wanted to live to see SkyClan rebuilt. He returns to give Leafstar one of her nine lives and he is also the cat to inform Firestar of the Power of Three prophecy: "There will be three, kin of your kin, who hold the power of the stars in their paws."


==== Cherrytail ====
A small tortoiseshell and white she-cat, Cherrytail was a former kittypet named Cherry, and teased Skywatcher for his strange behaviors, but later learns she is a SkyClan cat and becomes Cherrypaw, mentored by Sharpclaw. At the end of Firestar's Quest she receives her warrior name, and mentors Rockshade. She is the sister of Sparrowpelt. She is very brave, excitable, and lively.


==== Petalnose ====
A very pale grayalmost whiteshe-cat with blue eyes, Petalnose was a former kittypet named Petal who was rescued by Firestar, Sandstorm, and SkyClan from an abusive Twoleg. Her mate is Rainfur, who died in the battle with the rats, and her two kits are Mintfur and Sagepaw. After she was rescued she decided to stay in SkyClan with her mate and serve as a warrior once her kits were ready to be apprenticed, though her mate died shortly after in the battle against the rats. 


==== Patchfoot ====
A black-and-white tom with green eyes, Patchfoot was formerly a rogue named Patch. Due to a rat attack, his shoulder was injured. When he recovered, thanks to Spottedleaf showing Sandstorm and Firestar how to treat rat bites with burdock root, Patchfoot joined the fight against the rats. At the end of Firestar's Quest, he mentors Bouncepaw, who later turns into Bouncefire. In SkyClan's Destiny, Clovertail is expecting his kits.


==== Sparrowpelt ====
A dark brown tabby tom with yellow eyes, Sparrowpelt was formerly a kittypet named Boris. He and his sister Cherrytail teased Skywatcher for his strange behaviors. Later, however, he learns he is a SkyClan cat and becomes Sparrowpaw and was mentored by Leafdapple. In the end he receives his warrior name and mentors Tinycloud.


==== Rainfur ====
A light gray tom with dark gray flecks, Rainfur was formerly a rogue. At first, he didn't want to join SkyClan but later was forced to ask for the Clan's help to rescue his mate, Petal (later Petalnose), from her cruel Twoleg owner. In the end, he decided to join SkyClan but was killed in the battle against the rats. He appeared in Leafstar's leader ceremony to reassure Firestar that his death wasn't his fault. He is also the father of Mintfur and Sagepaw.


==== Clovertail ====
A light brown she-cat with a white belly and legs and green eyes, Clovertail was formerly a loner named Clover. She first met Firestar and Sandstorm while defending her kits against a fox. Afterwards, she joins SkyClan, but initially only for protection. In the end, her loyalty for SkyClan is proven when she fought in the battle against the rats. Apparently, she is partly descended from RiverClan, given that she is an avid swimmer and the fact that Firestar saw that Birchstar and Heavystep looked very much like Clovertail at Leafstar's leader ceremony. She is the mother of Rockshade, Bouncefire, and Tinycloud. She had three kits with Patchfoot: Birdpaw, Honeypaw, and Sandypaw.


==== Rockshade ====
A black tom with a torn ear, Rockshade is one of the three kits of Clovertail's litter, formerly a loner named Rock. His mentor is Cherrytail. His warrior name is revealed to be Rockshade in SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Tinycloud ====
A white she-cat with deep blue eyes, Tinycloud is one of the three kits of Clovertail's litter, formerly a loner named Tiny. Her mentor is Sparrowpelt. Her warrior name, Tinycloud, is revealed in SkyClan's Destiny. When she is given her warrior name, she disapproves of it. She says she is no longer tiny and should be named differently. Later, she approves of it, knowing that it is part of the warrior naming ritual.


==== Bouncefire ====
A ginger tom, Bouncefire is one of the three kits of Clovertail's litter, formerly a loner named Bounce. His mentor is Patchfoot. His warrior name is revealed to be Bouncefire in SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Sagepaw ====
Sagepaw is a pale gray tom (listed as a she-cat in the allegiances). He is named after the sage in his former Twoleg's garden. He is one of Petalnose and Rainfur's two kits, formerly a kittypet named Sage. His sister is Mintpaw. Erin Hunter said that Sagepaw did become a warrior after SkyClan's Destiny, but they forgot what his warrior name was. He is revealed to be Petalnose's apprentice in SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Mintfur ====
Mintfur is a gray tabby she-cat (listed as a tom in the allegiances). She is named after the mint in her former Twoleg's garden. She is one of Petalnose and Rainfur's two kits, formerly a kittypet named Mint. Her brother is Sagepaw. Her warrior name is revealed to be Mintfur. She is Waspwhisker's apprentice at the time of SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Lichenfur ====
Lichenfur is a former loner that refused to join SkyClan in Firestar's Quest, but joined sometime between that book and SkyClan's Destiny. In Firestar's Quest, her name was Lichen. She is described as a mottled gray she-cat with amber eyes.


==== Tangle ====
Tangle is a bad-tempered rogue that comes to the SkyClan territory occasionally for shelter in SkyClan's Destiny. He refused to listen to Firestar's offer to join SkyClan in Firestar's Quest. But a little later on he decided to join SkyClan as an elder. He is described as a large tabby tom with ragged fur and amber eyes.


==== Egg ====
Long-legged, sleek, cream-colored tom with blue eyes and a shredded ear. He joined SkyClan after Sharpclaw told him the fox was staying there for good. His mentor was Sharpclaw.


==== Waspwhisker ====
Gray and white tom with a scar that wraps around his belly down to his tail. Formerly a lost kittypet until SkyClan found him. His mate is Fallowfern and his kits are Nettlekit, Plumkit, Rabbitkit, and Creekkit. In the allegiances of SkyClan's Destiny, he is mistakenly called Hunchfoot because his name was changed at the last moment.


==== Shrewtooth ====
Skinny black tom. He is from the same twoleg house as Petalnose and her kits. He never told anyone where he was from and was nervous very often. Later on, the Clan attacked his former twoleg owner. At the end of SkyClan's Destiny, Leafstar said that Shrewtooth had gone from being extremely nervous, to one of her best warriors.


==== Ebonyclaw ====
Ebonyclaw is a striking black she-cat. She puts a wad of moss in between her neck and her kittypet collar, to keep it from making sound while hunting. She is a daylight-warrior. She was also Frecklepaw's original mentor.


==== Billystorm ====
Billystorm is a ginger and white tom with green eyes, and he is a daylight-warrior. He is in love with Leafstar and is Leafstar's mate. He also has kits with Leafstar.


==== Harveymoon ====
Harveymoon is a white tom with a broad back, and a daylight-warrior. He was banned from the clan for one moon along with Macgyver for arguing with Sharpclaw, saying that since they were not going to be sleeping in the caves, they should not have to clean them out. He comes back a much better warrior, along with Macgyver. In an exclusive SkyClan Manga, he chases out 2 dogs with Macgyver, showing their true loyalty.


==== Macgyver ====
Macgyver is a black and white tom, and a daylight-warrior. He was banned from the Clan for one moon along with Harveymoon for not helping clean the dens, saying that they wouldn't be sleeping there, so they shouldn't have to help clean them. It is said that he never took a warrior name.


==== Frecklewish ====
Mottled light brown tabby she-cat with spotted legs, and a daylight-warrior. She was originally Ebonyclaw's apprentice, but was later changed to the apprenticeship of Echosong, for training as a medicine cat. She was at first not accepted to be a medicine cat apprentice, because she was a daylight-warrior and wasn't there half of the time. In a manga at the end of SkyClan's Destiny it shows her full medicine cat name, Frecklewish.


==== Fallowfern ====
Pale brown she-cat with blue eyes. She is the mother of Waspwhisker's kits: Rabbitkit, Creekkit, Nettlekit, and Plumkit. In a manga at the end of SkyClan's Destiny it skips ahead and shows the kits getting their warrior names: Nettlesplash, Creekfeather, Plumwillow, and Rabbitleap.


==== Birdpaw ====
Birdpaw is a black she-cat with green eyes. She is shown to be bright and cheerful. She is Clovertail's and Patchfoot's daughter and the sister of Honeypaw and Sandypaw. She was one of the group of young warriors and apprentices that ate housecat food, and the human put medicine on her then injured eye to help it heal, which it did.


==== Honeypaw ====
Honeypaw is a pale she-cat. She is the sister of Birdpaw and Sandypaw and the daughter of Clovertail and Patchfoot.


==== Sandypaw ====
Sandypaw is a gray cat with darker gray legs and ears, her gender is unknown but suspected by most fans as a she-cat. She is the sister of Birdpaw and Honeypaw and the daughter of Clovertail and Patchfoot.


=== Former SkyClan Members ===
Cats that were at one time a part of SkyClan then left.


==== Shortwhisker ====
A brown tabby tom with amber eyes, Shortwhisker was formerly a kittypet named Hutch. During his time in SkyClan, Shortwhisker was nervous around other cats, similar to Ravenpaw in ThunderClan. He overcame his fear and fought in the battle against the rats. After the battle, he realizes that Clan life isn't suited for him, a decision that Firestar and Leafstar respect, and reverts to Hutch. Hutch also promised to spread the word to other cats about SkyClan.


==== Snookthorn ====
Black and white tom. Former day-light warrior. He left to be a house cat after he saw the look of hate in the humans' eyes when SkyClan was trying to help a child, as he said that humans were not his enemy. He left right after he got his warrior name. Also a SkyClan descendant.


==== Stick ====
Brown tom with yellow eyes and a torn ear. Stick joined SkyClan but when it was time for his warrior naming, he decided to keep his name. He stayed at his town after the battle with Dodge. Father to Red and former mate of Velvet.


==== Shorty ====
Brown tom with a stub for a tail and amber eyes. Shorty joined SkyClan but when it was time for his warrior naming, he decided to keep his name, similar to what Stick did. He stayed at his town after the battle with Dodge.


==== Coal ====
Black tom with amber eyes and a long coat. Coal joined SkyClan but when it was time for his warrior naming, he decided to keep his name. He stayed at his town after the battle with Dodge.


==== Cora ====
Black she-cat with a ripped ear. Cora joined SkyClan but when it was time for her warrior naming, she kept her own name. She stayed at her town after the battle with Dodge.


=== Ancient SkyClan Cats ===
Not much is known about the ancient SkyClan cats, who were driven out of the forest by Twolegs, as not many details were added. There are more cats, but some of their names are not mentioned in the book.


==== Cloudstar ====
A small, light pale gray tom with white patches like clouds, huge water-blue eyes, thorn-sharp claw tips, and a neat, well-shaped head, Cloudstar was the leader of SkyClan when they were driven from the forest. Cloudstar and his Clan used to live in what is now the Twolegplace and were forced to leave the forest because of human developments over that area, despite asking other Clans for assistance. Cloudstar's mate, Birdflight stayed behind with ThunderClan because of her kits. Cloudstar came into Firestar's dreams to plead for help and to tell him that he must rebuild SkyClan, and also visited the dreams of Firestar's old friend Smudge, whose house is situated over the place where the SkyClan camp used to be. In the end, SkyClan was rebuilt and Cloudstar comes to give Leafstar one of her nine lives and reunites with Birdflight, as well as their kits, Spottedpelt and Gorseclaw. Because of Spottedleaf and Tigerclaw's striking resemblance to Spottedpelt and Gorseclaw, it is believed that they are descended from SkyClan.


==== Buzzardstar ====
Cloudstar's deputy, a ginger tom with green eyes. His warrior name is Buzzardtail. He becomes leader after Cloudstar, according to SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Fawnstep ====
SkyClan's medicine cat when SkyClan was driven out of the forest, a small light brown tabby she-cat with a white chest and paws. She is believed to walk in Echosong's dreams, and she taught Echosong, seeing as there was no official medicine cat to train her when she joined.


==== Birdflight ====
Birdflight was a beautiful, long-furred light brown tabby she-cat with amber eyes. Birdflight was Cloudstar's mate, and stayed behind in ThunderClan to save her kits, Spottedpelt and Gorseclaw.


==== Fernpelt ====
Fernpelt is a dark brown tabby she-cat. In one of Firestar's dreams, she catches a squirrel to show Firestar that he should look for cats that have jumping skills as SkyClan descendants.


==== Mousefang ====
Mousefang was a sand-colored she-cat with green eyes.


==== Nightfur ====
Nightfur was a black tom with a gray muzzle.


==== Oakstep ====
A gray tabby tom, his revealed warrior name is Oakstep in SkyClan's Destiny.


==== Spottedpelt ====
Slender tortoiseshell she-cat. She is Gorseclaw's sister. Stayed in ThunderClan when SkyClan left the forest, since they were tiny kits, unable to make any journey. Said to bear a very strong resemblance to Spottedleaf, and she is related to Spottedleaf and Tigerstar.


==== Gorseclaw ====
Dark brown tabby tom with amber eyes. He is Spottedpelt's brother. He stayed in ThunderClan when SkyClan left the forest, since they were tiny kits, unable to make any journey. Said to bear a very strong resemblance to Tigerstar, and is related to both Tigerstar and Spottedleaf.


==== Spiderstar ====
Last leader of Ancient SkyClan. Spiderstar was a dark brown tabby tom.


==== Honeyleaf ====
Last deputy of Ancient SkyClan. Honeyleaf was a ginger tabby she-cat with green eyes.


==== Brackenheart ====
Last medicine cat of Ancient SkyClan. Brackenheart was a young brown tabby tom.


=== Minor SkyClan Characters ===
The following are characters in SkyClan that have a minor part in the Warriors series.


== BloodClan ==
BloodClan is a group of ex-kittypets, rogues, and loners (cats who are not kittypets or part of a Clan) living in the large section of human suburbs (Twolegplace) located outside the forest, distinguished by the fact that they wear collars laden with teeth. BloodClan does not have a warrior code, do not believe in StarClan, and do not have the organization structure found in the other Clans. As a result, BloodClan is run in the style of a dictatorship, and cats who either break the rules or desire to leave are maimed or killed.


=== Bone ===
Bone is a black and white tom with green eyes. He serves as the unofficial "deputy" of BloodClan, and is Scourge's main enforcer, performing his dirty work. He also wears a collar around his neck similar to Scourge's. Said collar has similar dog and cat teeth. He kills Whitestorm during the final battle in The Darkest Hour before being swarmed and killed by a group of apprentices: Bramblepaw, Tawnypaw, Ashpaw, Featherpaw, and Stormpaw.


=== Scourge ===
Scourge (Tiny at birth), a very small black tom with icy blue eyes and a single white paw, rules BloodClan through fear and a survival-of-the-fittest mentality and refuses to provide for any cat who cannot support him- or herself. He permits the mates of she-cats nursing kits to hunt for their mates purely out of pragmatism, so that the Clan does not cease to exist when all the elder cats die and there are no younger cats to replace them. Despite his small size, he is a very capable and dangerous fighter and neither any sort of warrior's ethical code or merciful impulses restrain him in battle; he is brutal and ruthless (Rock says in Cats of the Clans that he lacks "any sense of right or wrong"). To show his capability to kill, he wears a collar of teeth and claws from dogs and cats he has killed and his claws have been reinforced with dogs' teeth. His weakness is revealed to be his skepticism towards StarClan, which means he does not have nine lives.
It has been confirmed by the authors that Firestar is Scourge's half-brother (Scourge and Firestar share the same father), as implied in The Rise of Scourge when Quince wonders about why the litter did not share its father's ginger color, making Firestar also the half-brother of Socks and Ruby, Scourge's littermates. Scourge is then related to Cloudtail, Leafpool, Princess, Squirrelflight, Whitewing, Whitewing's kits Dovewing and Ivypool, Lionblaze, Hollyleaf, and Jayfeather.
Scourge's evil behavior is explained in The Rise of Scourge. It is revealed that, from a young age, his brother Socks and sister Ruby treat him badly, bullying him about his size and mocking him. His mother tells them not to pick on him but never really defends him the way he wants her to. When Ruby teases him that he will be drowned in the river because no humans want to adopt him, Scourge runs away by himself. He wanders into forest territory and is attacked by Tigerpaw who is patrolling the border of ThunderClan territory with Bluefur and his mentor, Thistleclaw. Tigerpaw wants to kill him, but is stopped at the last moment by Bluefur. Scourge develops a lifelong grudge against Tigerpaw. Afraid to go home and terrified to go into the forest and face more abuse from cats like Tigerpaw, Scourge soon moves to the alleys of a city, where he finds an old dog. One of its teeth falls out and he tries to use it to cut off his collar, but ends up getting it stuck. He finds a group of thin cats who are eating a small piece of chicken from human garbage. In order to convince them to share their food he makes up a story about killing a dog and ripping the teeth from its skull as a sort of trophy. Though skeptical, the cats let him have a bite.
The next day, however, a group of cats, led by two cats called Bone and Brick, have heard his story. They ask him to kill a dog behind a deli who is stealing their food. Afraid of the dog, but realizing that he will be revealed to be a liar and driven out if he refuses to fight the dog, Scourge approaches the dog. By sheer luck, the dog is frightened by Scourge's shadow, which appears about three times as large as Scourge really is, and flees; Scourge is clever enough to convince the other cats he frightened the dog away. The other stray cats are amazed and treat him almost like a god. This is the point where he decides to change his name; the other cats have never asked for his name before, so instead of telling them his name is Tiny, he makes up the new, more intimidating name Scourge. He becomes the leader by default, and cats begin to seek his advice and aid. A group of rogues from the forest wander in and begin bullying and abusing the local cats, who turn to their leader, Scourge, for protection. Scourge cannot bluff these cats as he tricked the dog, and the forest rogues openly mock and threaten him. Unwilling to back away from his position of power, Scourge kills one of them in cold blood, frightening the other forest rogues away and solidifying his hold over the alley cats.
Later, Socks and Ruby wander into his territory; they are adopted as house cats, but become lost and forgotten when their owners move; as dependent pets, they never learn to hunt for their own food. Scourge shouts at them, saying he cannot help it if they are too weak to feed themselves. Ruby then asks if blood means anything to him, to which Scourge replies that it is everything to him and how the blood of his enemies soaks into his fur. He then says that he is the leader of BloodClan, which shocks his siblings. Scourge finally lets them eat some of his food until they are full, but after they are finished Scourge banishes them from his territory, completing his transformation into a cold-blooded villain.
Scourge forms the alleycats into BloodClan. They copy his ways, even making collars for themselves out of the teeth of the dogs they have slain and cats they have murdered. Scourge appoints Bone, a terrifying black and white cat, as his second in command. Tigerstar is led by Boulder, a former follower of Scourge, into Scourge's territory within the maze-like alleys. Tigerstar, who is at this point leader of ShadowClan, is slightly amused by the tiny leader but after seeing the numbers of his followers and their collars decides to ask Scourge to join him in battle against Thunderclan and WindClan, promising him their land. He never intends to keep his agreement, thinking that once he had all the forest clans united under his rule, he will easily be able to betray Scourge, whom he underestimates because of Scourge's small size and his own overconfident arrogance. He clearly does not remember the time when he almost murdered the small black cat as a kitten, though Scourge certainly remembers and despises him, though he very deliberately says nothing about their past confrontation. During the battle with LionClan (WindClan and ThunderClan allied together) Tigerstar tells Scourge's followers to attack, but Scourge's followers refuse to fight without Scourge's orders, enraging Tigerstar. When Scourge refuses to order BloodClan's cats to attack, Tigerstar attacks Scourge, who proves more formidable than Tigerstar realized. Scourge takes his revenge by killing Tigerstar, cutting his belly open, and watched him gleefully as all his lives were stripped from him. Later in the battle Scourge takes one of Firestar's lives, but is killed later by the ThunderClan leader. It is unknown where Scourge's spirit went after his death.


=== Ice ===
Ice (born Jumper) is one of Barley's brothers who joins BloodClan and becomes one of Scourge's followers, like Snake. He nearly kills his own sister, Violet.


=== Snake ===
Snake (born Hoot) is the other one of Barley's brothers who joined BloodClan. He, too, was responsible for almost killing Violet, and is the first to tell Barley of their major change.


=== Brick ===
Brick is a russet colored cat, a friend of Bone and Scourge, but also a supporter of Tiny/Scourge even before BloodClan is formed. Brick asks Tiny/Scourge to fight one of the dogs in the town that is keeping them from a dumpster full of food.


== StarClan ==
After death, most of the spirits of Clan cats join StarClan. StarClan is said to be represented by Silverpelt (the Milky Way), and each individual star represents a single dead warrior. Once a cat dies, he or she joins StarClan in a form in which he or she was most comfortable in. For example, blindness and deafness would be cured, unless the cat had been happier being deaf or blind. StarClan's territory is a forest that is perpetually in summer conditions. There are neither conflicts (usually) nor disease present. StarClan cats do not remain in StarClan eternally. Instead, they are eventually forgotten by the living and their spirits in StarClan fade slowly away, as mentioned in Fading Echoes (second book in the fourth series Omen of the Stars).
StarClan warriors keep watch over the Clans, usually watching their own Clan. They provide guidance to the Clans, often in dreams and other signs and omens. StarClan usually visits leaders and medicine cats. Often, this occurs with medicine cats at either the Moonstone revealed in Into the Wild (Warriors original series) or later at the Moonpool revealed in Starlight (The New Prophecy series). Also, in Firestar's Quest, Leafdapple receives her nine lives in Sky's Den (Skywatcher's Cave). It is rare for StarClan to visit warriors. StarClan cannot or do not choose to influence events in the real world. However, in Firestar's Quest, Spottedleaf visited both Firestar and Sandstorm, and treated an injured warrior, showing that StarClan indeed has some level of effect on the real world. The fact that Cinderpelt was reincarnated as Cinderheart is contradictory to that StarClan cannot influence the real world, although they may have chosen to do so.
Towards the end of "The Last Hope" Cinderpelt's spirit steps out of Cinderheart.


== The Place of No Stars/The Dark Forest ==
The Place of No Stars, also known as the Dark Forest, is where the spirits of cats who have caused great pain and suffering in the lives of others go or are banished to. In this place, although there is no sun, moon, nor any stars, the entire forest is bathed in a sickly glow. There is no prey or hunger either. Cats known to walk the Dark Forest include Thistleclaw, Tigerstar, Hawkfrost, Brokenstar, Darkstripe, Clawface and Mapleshade. Victoria Holmes revealed on the website concerning fantasy authors Wands and Worlds that StarClan and The Dark Forest exist on different planes; however, there is a clear border between the territories, marked by a wall of mist. Many Clan cats in the Omen of the Stars series visit there for training for a battle against the Clans. However, many of them are oblivious to the fact that the warriors of the Dark Forest are actually training them to destroy the Clans, including StarClan, in their upcoming battle. Instead, they tell the Clan cats that they are doing this to become better warriors. In The Place of No Stars, cats who wish to leave are killed. The cats in training are ordered to fight with their claws unsheathed, which causes wounds in the real world. Some of the Dark Forest warriors demonstrate what they will be training by using other Dark Forest warriors as dummies. During many of the demonstrations the 'dummies' are maimed or killed. In Omen of the Stars, Ivypool trains there, but when she realizes that it is not right, Jayfeather, Lionblaze, and Dovewing ask her to spy on the Dark Forest, because there is a battle between them, Starclan, and the Clans yet to come. In the Great Battle, the Dark Forest spirits attack.


== The Tribe of Rushing Water ==

The Tribe of Rushing Water is a group of smaller cats living in the northern caves of the mountain range that divides much of the land between the old forest territories and the lake territories. Tribe cats do not believe in StarClan; instead, they have their own spiritual equivalent, the Tribe of Endless Hunting. In the Tribe, there is no medicine cat or deputy: the leader, always known as Teller of the Pointed Stones, or Healer, serves both duties in addition to leader. Upon birth, Tribe cats are named by their mother for the first thing they see (which, incidentally, is usually not Floor/Roof/Wall of Cave or somesuch, as described by Rock in "Cats of the Clans"). Eventually, a Tribe cat trains as a to-be (apprentice). They can be either a cave-guard or a prey-hunter, based on their physical appearance, and this future role is determined at birth. Strong, sturdy cats are chosen to be cave-guards, whose job is to defend the Tribe's camp against intruders as well as provide cover for the prey-hunters while hunting. Prey-hunters, chosen for their slender, agile bodies, are adept at hunting in the rocky mountain terrain and can leap high enough to catch large birds. Kit-mothers take care of kits. Tribe cats often cover themselves in mud in order to better blend in with their surroundings, allowing them to catch larger, more exotic prey such as hawks and eagles. It also protects them from the cold mountain wind.
The Tribe typically have no enemies, which leaves them unprepared for attacks by other large predators, an example being Sharptooth. Another example is the other groups of cats attempting to take their territory. They have a firmly rooted tradition, and as such do not welcome the beliefs of other cats, a theme which incorporates the use of people from different cultural and traditional ways of thinking working together to solve a common goal. It is revealed in Outcast of the Power of Three series that the Tribe is among the descendants of the ancient clan of cats who originally lived in the lake territories, of which Rock and Fallen Leaves are members.
Throughout the series, the Clan cats commonly call the Tribe cats by the first word in their name, rather than the whole name (e.g., Lark, Pine, and Brook).


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The Tribe of Rushing Water is primarily introduced in Moonrise and visited again briefly in Dawn. In Twilight, Stormfur and Brook visit ThunderClan, staying until Outcast. Following The New Prophecy series, the Tribe is featured again in Outcast of the Power of Three series. All characters listed here also appear in Outcast. In Moonrise, they thought Stormfur was the silver cat who was supposed to kill Sharptooth, the mountain lion, but Feathertail (Stormfur's sister) was actually the silver cat and died for the Tribe. When the Clans traveled in Dawn to their new lake home, they were sheltered in the Tribe's caves. In Outcast, they used the Clan's help to drive out intruders.


==== Stormfur ====
A dark gray tom with amber eyes, Stormfur was formerly a RiverClan cat and has lived in ThunderClan, but currently lives in the Tribe of Rushing Water. He was first introduced as a kit, Stormkit, in Forest of Secrets, when his mother, Silverstream, a RiverClan cat, bore him and his sister, Featherkit, on Sunningrocks in ThunderClan territory, ultimately bleeding out her life for it. Their father was Graystripe, a ThunderClan cat, and in order to avoid shedding blood because of a war between RiverClan and ThunderClan over the kits, he brought them himself to RiverClan and stayed with them. Stormkit became an apprentice, Stormpaw, along with his sister Featherpaw, in A Dangerous Path, mentored by Stonefur.
He and his mate, Brook, met in her Tribe home, and fell in love. He and Brook returned to the forest and helped ThunderClan rebuild from the badger attack and head on to RiverClan. Then, he stayed in ThunderClan when he was banished from RiverClan. He is Graystripe and Silverstream's son, Feathertail's brother, and the half-brother of Bumblestripe, Briarlight, and Blossomfall. Stormfur was very close to Feathertail, but as protective as he was of his sister, he wasn't very happy with her relationship with Crowpaw and openly rejected the tom. He has since decided to return to the Tribe with Brook. He forged his strongest relationships from the journey with Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight. In Moonrise, he felt a brief attraction to Squirrelflight, but flung his affections aside for the good of their Clans. He was unable to ignore his love for Brook so easily. He gets over his mild crush on Squirrelflight and proves it by playfully teasing Bramblestar and Squirrelflight, along with Tawnypelt, about their care for each other. In Outcast, he shows a close relationship with Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight's apparent son Lionblaze. He confides in Lionblaze his past feelings for his supposed mother, making Lionblaze wonder what it would have been like to have Stormfur as a father instead. When Stormfur, Brook, Brambleclaw, Tawnypelt, Crowfeather, Breezepelt, Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, and Jayfeather go with Night and Talon to help the Tribe with the intruders, Stormfur and Brook decide that they want to stay in the Tribe, so they say good-bye to the others in Eclipse.
He is father of Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine). Stormfur's also grandson to Crookedstar (Silverstream's father), grand-nephew to Oakheart, great-grandson to Rainflower and Shellheart, cousin to Stonefur (who also was his mentor), Mistystar, and Mosskit (Oakheart's kits), grand-cousin to Primerosepaw, Pikepaw, and Perchkit, Graymist, and Reedwhisker, Mallowpaw and Sneezepaw (Graymist's kits).


==== Brook Where Small Fish Swim ====
Brook is a slender, brown tabby she-cat with gray eyes and is a prey-hunter within the Tribe. She is first introduced in Moonrise, when the journeying group of Clan cats accidentally stumbles upon the Tribe, and instantly takes a liking to Stormfur.
Stormfur decides to stay with Brook in the mountains when the exodus of the four Clans passes through. However, they are exiled from the Tribe following a disastrous attempt by Stormfur to rally the Tribe cats in order to force a group of intruding cats out, after which they travel to the new lake territory of ThunderClan. Brook is sorrowful for Stoneteller's decision to banish Stormfur, but remains by his side. She eventually learns to hunt and live in the forest and is accepted as a full ThunderClan cat, often providing advice to the younger cats based on her experiences in the mountains. During the events of Outcast she and Stormfur return to the Tribe along with a collection of Clan warriors in order to deal with the intruders threatening the mountains.
Brook has two brothers, Crag Where Eagles Nest (Crag), and Talon of Swooping Eagle (Talon). She is Stormfur's mate. She is the mother of Lark That Sings At Dawn (Lark) and Pine That Clings To Rock (Pine).


==== Talon of Swooping Eagle ====
Talon is a massive, broad-shouldered dark brown tabby tom with amber eyes and a scar across the side of his face who serves as a cave-guard in the Tribe. He was first introduced in Moonrise as a Tribe exile, banished by Stoneteller along with other cats for failing to successfully kill the mountain lion Sharptooth. He is also revealed to be Brook's brother, along with Crag. After the group of Clan cats chosen by StarClan on the journey to the sun-drown-place pass through the mountains and attempt to solve the Tribe's problem, Talon, Bird, and Rock return to the Tribe in order to help with the plan to kill Sharptooth. He becomes a member of the Tribe once again after Sharptooth is killed. Talon returns in Outcast and, along with Night of No Stars (Night), journeys to the Clans for help when the Tribe is having problems with trespassing cats stealing prey. In Sign of the Moon he becomes an elder.


==== Teller of the Pointed Stones ====
Stoneteller, as he is more commonly known, serves as the Healer of the Tribe. He is an old, long-bodied dark brown tabby tom with a white muzzle and amber eyes. The Healer performs the duties of both a leader and medicine cat, essentially granting him both traditional and spiritual authority over his Tribemates. The name given to the Tribe's healer is always the same, and as such there have been several Stonetellers over the course of the Tribe's history. This particular Stoneteller is well-suited to leading his Tribe, but is forced to deal with a number of crises (Sharptooth, the unnamed group of trespassing cats, etc.) that threaten their survival and unnerve his faith in the Tribe of Endless Hunting, the Tribe's spiritual equivalent of StarClan. As there are no other cats in a position of power to advise him, Stoneteller often feels overwhelmed by his responsibilities and can be prone to making rash decisions.Later in Sign of the Moon, he dies of old age.


==== Crag Where Eagles Nest ====
A dark gray tom with amber eyes, Crag was one of the cats that found the Clans when they were lost on the mountains on the Great Journey. In Sign of the Moon he becomes the new Teller of the Pointed Stones after his predecessor dies. He is brother of Brook and Talon.


== Ancient cats ==
These are characters first mentioned in Dark River of the Power of Three series. They are as yet unknown to all cats except Jayfeather, whose extrasensory perception allows him to discover clues hidden in an ancient stick located near the lake. It is hinted in Outcast that these cats have ties to the Tribe of Rushing Water. In Long Shadows (5th book in the third series Power of Three), Jayfeather convinces the group to journey to the mountains to live there, hinting they are the direct ancestors of the Tribe. Although, the stick is broken by Jayfeather, he still is able to connect with Rock since his first birth is as Jay's Wing in the time of the ancient cats, where he realised that his brother, Lionblaze, and Dovewing are also first born in the time of the ancient cats as Lion's Roar and Dove's Wing, except Dove's Wing is Jay's Wing's(Jayfeather's) sister and Lion's Roar is not his brother at that time.


=== Power of Three Series ===
The Ancient Clan was primarily introduced in Dark River and has played a minor role in all subsequent novels.


=== Ancient Clan Conventions ===
There are several differences between the modern Clans and the Ancient ones. These will be listed below.
Ancient Clan cats are more like a group of cats living together than a Clan, in that leaders can retire whenever they like, and that there are no definite territory boundaries.
The cats in the Clan make major decisions by, 'casting stones', where a line is drawn in the dirt, and each cat pushes a stone to the side\decision they choose.
In the modern Clans, Clan deputies, when they became leaders, had to stay leaders until they died, even if they grew old. With the Ancient Clans, leaders could choose their successors and step down from the post whenever they wanted.


=== Ancient Clan Characters ===


==== Fallen Leaves ====
Fallen Leaves, a muscular shouldered ginger and white tom with green eyes and the son of Broken Shadow and Stone Song, is one of the Ancient Cats who went into the tunnels to become sharpclaws (the equivalent of warriors). These tunnels run underneath ThunderClan and WindClan territory, in which Lionpaw and Heatherpaw played in at night. Three WindClan kits strayed into them when the floods were rising, and Lionpaw, Jaypaw, Hollypaw, Heatherpaw, and Breezepaw had to rescue them. It was then that Fallen Leaves guided Jaypaw through, finding the kits and averting a battle. Later, in Eclipse, the three kits reveal the tunnels to WindClan, and WindClan use them as an opportunity to ambush ThunderClan.
Fallen Leaves had entered the tunnels to prove he was a sharpclaw. However, he neglected to mention to Rock that rain might fall. This proved his downfall, as when it rained, the tunnels flooded, and he drowned. Jayfeather dreamed about his journey in the tunnels, and before he died, Fallen Leaves suddenly realized Jayfeather was walking with him.
The Erins said that Fallen Leaves still hasn't accepted the fact that he is dead, and this is why Fallen Leaves' spirit still walks through the tunnels. In Long Shadows, he was dismayed to hear that Jayfeather was not staying with him, and his death is a catalyst for the Ancient Clans moving from the lake to the mountains.


==== Rock ====
Rock is a very old cat. He is described in Dark River as his pelt like moleskin, the fur gone except for tufts along his spine, and his sightless eyes bulging like eggs, thus depicting him as ancient to the Ancient Clans. He watches over all of the Clans (including SkyClan, BloodClan, and the Tribe of Rushing Water, in addition to the rogues, loners, and kittypets known to the four Clans, as well as having an acquaintance with Midnight and Sol), and as he says in Cats of the Clans he knows the destiny and innermost thoughts of each cat. In his introduction in the prologue of Dark River, he is in a cave and greets Fallen Leaves before the young cat goes into the tunnels. He later meets with Jayfeather and tells him he must go to the mountains in Outcast. He is the narrator of Cats of the Clans, and talks with three kits from StarClan: Mosskit, a half-ThunderClan, half-RiverClan kit who died on the way to RiverClan with Stonefur and Mistyfoot, Adderkit, a WindClan kit ironically killed by a snake, and Blossomkit, a ShadowClan kit who was forced into battle when she was too young on Brokenstar's demand, and was killed in the battle. He seems to know all about the Clans (although some of his knowledge is a little off in Cats of the Clans), and is very keen in particular to Jayfeather, supporting the prophecy. It is revealed in The Fourth Apprentice that he knew of Jayfeather, Hollyleaf and Lionblaze's heritage. In Sign of the Moon he tells Jayfeather that he was once the Teller of Pointed Stones for the Tribe of Rushing Water.


==== Furled Bracken ====
A dark ginger tabby tom with muscular shoulders and amber eyes, Furled Bracken is the leader of the ancient Clan that lived at the lake before the four Clans. When Stone Song requests for the stones to be cast, he accepts. When Jayfeather, or who the Clan thinks he is, Jay's Wing, tries to go forward to make his decision, he holds him back, telling him that he must choose last because he is the newest sharpclaw. When the decision is made to leave, Furled Bracken appoints Stone Song as leader, much to Jayfeather's surprise.


==== Stone Song ====
A hefty dark gray tabby tom with glittering ice blue eyes, Stone Song is known to be a sharpclaw of the ancient Clan that lived at the lake before the four Clans. He is intrigued by Jay's Wing's, or rather Jaypaw's dream about the mountains. He seems quite confident, and is the cat who asks Furled Bracken for the stones to be cast. After the decision is made to leave, Furled Bracken appoints him as leader. Stone Song later asks Jay's Wing to help him lead the tribe to their new home. He is the father of Fallen Leaves and mate of Broken Shadow.


==== Broken Shadow ====
A slender orange tabby she-cat with white paws and amber eyes, Broken Shadow is also known to be a sharpclaw of the ancient Clan that lived at the lake before the four Clans. In Dark River, Broken Shadow is not mentioned directly by name. She is seen sadly watching her son, Fallen Leaves, enter the tunnels for his assessment with Rock to become a sharpclaw. Broken Shadow protests his leaving, saying that the skies look like they might rain. Fallen Leaves continues on stubbornly though, not wanting to put off his becoming a full sharpclaw any longer, though that same impatience was ultimately his fate.
In Long Shadows when everyone is corgratulating Jaypaw for making it out of the tunnels and all throughout the times we see Broken Shadow, she is still grieving for Fallen Leaves.


==== Half Moon ====
A white she-cat with green eyes, Half Moon is another one of the Ancient Cats known to be the ancestors of the Tribe of Rushing Water. She is a calm and kind she-cat, and she was in love with Jay's Wing. Half Moon helped Jaypaw (Jay's Wing) when he was confused about where he was, and she shows obvious affection towards Jay's Wing, willing to leave if he was. At the end of Sign of the Moon, she says: "I will wait for you forever, Jay's Wing!". She defended him when Fish Leap bullied him, and during the casting of the stones, Half Moon went to the 'leave' side. She also made a brief appearance during Jaypaw's naming ceremony, and it could be noted that she loves both Jayfeather and Jay's Wing since they are both to be the same cat. She is apparently a very good hunter, helping Jay's Wing to catch prey when he found it difficult. In Sign of the Moon, Half Moon is made the first Teller of the Pointed Stones by Jayfeather, because she was the one who saw the "sign of the moon"


==== Jay's Wing ====
A gray tabby tom with blue eyes, Jay's Wing is a cat training to be a sharpclaw (warrior) of the ancients that lived at the lake before the four Clans. In Long Shadows, Jayfeather is taken back in time by Fallen Leaves, and walks in Jay's Wing's pawsteps. Jay's Wing/Jayfeather asks questions that confuse most of the Ancients. He helps Fallen Leaves's tribe decide to leave the lake by telling the leader, Furled Bracken, about a dream he had, one about the mountains the Tribe of Rushing Water lives in. He never truly had that dream, but rather had visited the mountains himself. After the beginning of the journey, Rock calls Jayfeather back and tells him it is time to return to ThunderClan. He reincarnated as Jayfeather, which is why when Jayfeather went back in time, he becomes Jay's Wing.


==== Dove's Wing ====
A pretty pale gray she-cat with blue eyes, Dove's Wing is known to be a cat training to be a sharpclaw (warrior). Dove's Wing is sister to Jay's Wing, who, unknown to her, is Jayfeather thrust into the past. When Jay's Wing asks a strange question in front of a group of softpaws (apprentices), she says he must have hit his head on the rocky floor of the tunnel. When Jayfeather goes back in time and comes out as Jay's Wing, he suspects that Dove's Wing might be Dovewing's counterpart.


==== Lion's Roar ====
A small, compact, strong golden tabby tom, Lion's Roar is born to Shy Fawn and Dark Whiskers in Sign of the Moon. When he first enters the world, he is motionless and so all the other cats thinks he's dead. Jayfeather (Jay's Wing) licks him, and he lets out a loud wail, which some other cat says sounds like a lion's roar, which is what Shy Fawn named him. Jayfeather thinks he reincarnated as Lionblaze, which gives him the idea that Dove's Wing might be Dovewing, as it would make sense for the Three to have had a past life since he did, too.


=== Gray Wing ===
Gray Wing is a sleek, dark gray tom with golden eyes. When Stoneteller (also known as Half-Moon) receives the vision of some of her cats leaving to follow the sun to a better home, he cast his rock with the ones that want to stay. He watches with a sad heart as the majority of his tribe leaves, though his mother still remains. His brother and sister (still kits) are too young to go, so they stay as well. When Jagged Peak, Gray Wing's brother, leaves to follow the group going to a better place, he bravely goes out to find him. At this point, Jagged Peak is being attacked by an eagle. Gray Wing arrived just in time to save Jagged Peak, and they rush to catch up with the rest of the group. One of Gray Wing's best friends, Turtle Tail, is there, and she secretly likes Gray Wing. At the time, he just regards her as a friend. Clear Sky, his brother, really wants to get to their new home, and upon arrival, he moves into the forest instead of staying in the moor. He establishes boundaries and challenges any trespassing cat, much to Gray Wing's dismay. Turtle Tail moves to live as a housecat, hurt when she figures out that Gray Wing is secretly in love with a cat named Storm. Lonely now, he continues his roles as a moor cat. When Tall Shadow, the leader of the group, begins to make choices that most cats in the group disagree with, a cat named Shattered Ice challenge her leadership. He requests Gray Wing take over, but Gray Wing refuses and explains that every cat should give Tall Shadow the respect she deserves. Turtle Tail returns, and Shattered Ice is furious that she dares to come back. Tall Shadow accepts her, which angers Shattered Ice further. Later on, Gray Wing discovers that Turtle Tail is bearing the kits of a kittypet named Tom. Turtle Tail reveals to him that she left the humans because one of her friends, a she-cat named Bumble, told her that once she gave birth, the humans would take her kits away. She asked if Gray Wing would be their father and at first he is hesitant. Later, he accepts and Turtle Tail gives birth to three healthy kits: Pebble Heart, Sparrow Fur, and Owl Eyes. After a fire, Tall Shadow steps down from leadership and gives it to Gray Wing. Gray Wing unwillingly takes the role, but is permanently weakened from too much smoke inhalation. He leads for a while, but eventually steps down and never becomes a true Clan leader. However, his actions and wise decisions cause many future generations to know him as Graywing the Wise.


=== Original Series ===
The Original series covers events in the story from Into the Wild to The Darkest Hour. Many characters mentioned here were introduced in the Original series, but play minor or significant roles in The New Prophecy and Power of Three series as well.


==== Barley ====
Barley is a black-and-white tom that lives in a barn beyond WindClan territory. He is met by Firepaw while he is on his first journey to the Highstones, a remote region of caves which house the Moonstone, the source of the Clans' connection to StarClan. Barley is a friendly cat and always willing to help cats in need of shelter. He openly accepts Ravenpaw when he makes his escape from ThunderClan, and the two live a comfortable existence afterward.
Barley comes with Ravenpaw to ThunderClan in The Darkest Hour in order to assist Firestar as he deals with the impending invasion of BloodClan, when he reveals that he was in fact a former member of BloodClan. Barley and his littermates were automatically placed under Scourge's rule at birth, and his two brothers, Ice and Snake, formerly called Jumper and Hoot, soon became fierce enforcers of Scourge's orders. When Barley defied one of the Clan's principal rules in caring for and living with his sister, Violet, Ice and Snake attacked them and left Violet heavily injured. Barley narrowly escaped with Violet and left her in the care of a generous Twoleg, while he left the territory altogether and eventually happened upon the abandoned barn (which revealed by "Secrets of the Clans", he crossed clan territory to get there). He reveals the secret of Scourge's weakness to Firestar: that since Scourge does not believe in StarClan, he only has one life. Barley then fights alongside Firestar and Ravenpaw. The remaining cats of all four Clans against BloodClan.
Barley and Ravenpaw finally assisted the Clans in their exodus by allowing them shelter in The New Prophecy series. They are presumed to be continuing their peaceful existence, though they are now effectively separated from the Clans due to the immense distance between them.


==== Hattie ====
Hattie is a pretty brown tabby she-cat with amber eyes who now lives in Firestar's former Twoleg home. She was shown in Firestar's old Twolegs' garden in The Darkest Hour, but it was in Firestar's Quest when she was properly introduced as the new kittypet of Firestar's former Twoleg owners when she asked him if he wanted to use her scratching tree. She is a neighbor and friend of Smudge, and has not been mentioned after Firestar's Quest.


==== Princess ====
Princess, a light brown tabby with a distinctive white chest and paws, is Firestar's kittypet sister. He initially discovers her garden in Fire and Ice, and returns regularly to talk with her throughout the Original series. Princess is enthralled by Firestar's stories of living in the forest, but also worries about him due to his often ragged appearance. Upon learning that her kits are to be given away, she gives one of them to Firestar to take back to ThunderClan. This kit eventually becomes Cloudtail, a well-known ThunderClan warrior.


==== Jake ====
Jake is a plump ginger tom. He is Firestar's father. He is also the father of Princess and the grandfather of Cloudtail, Leafpool and Squirrelflight. He is the father of Scourge, Socks, and Ruby, but they have a different mother, Quince. In Bluestar's Prophecy, Bluepaw talked to Jake when a squirrel she was chasing went over a twoleg fence. His mate is Nutmeg.


==== Henry ====
Henry is a cat who lives in the Twolegplace that Firestar originally came from. He apparently went to the vet and was never the same since. Henry is only mentioned in the first book and does not have any real significance in the story. He was brought to the cutter (vet) and apparently got 'fixed', losing his ability to be a 'real tom'.


==== Ravenpaw ====
Ravenpaw is a sleek, skinny black loner with a tiny white dash on his chest, and a white-tipped tail who lives at the barn with Barley. Ravenpaw has lost his clumsiness, and become more confident while living with Barley. Ravenpaw was originally a ThunderClan apprentice, but was forced to leave the clan when he saw Tigerclaw, his mentor, murder the ThunderClan deputy, Redtail. This knowledge put his life in danger. He is happy at Barley's barn; the loner lifestyle suits him better than Clan life.
Ravenpaw has his own manga series, Ravenpaw's Path, which was released on November 24, 2009.


==== Smudge ====
Smudge is a friendly, contented, plump black and white tom with a narrow face, round amber eyes, black shoulders, a white tail-tip, and a black nose who was Firestar's best friend during his kithood. Smudge was upset when Firestar decided to leave Twolegplace and live in the forest, but he accepted his friend's decision. Smudge is very comfortable with his life, and cannot imagine why Firestar wants to live in the forest with a bunch of "violent ruffians". Though he misses his friend, he manages to get along well with Firestar's replacement, a she-cat named Hattie.
Smudge's garden sits on the exact location of the ancient camp of SkyClan, and as a result he is fraught with dreams involving the lost Clan's exodus in Firestar's Quest. He mistakenly interprets these dreams as a sign that he must live in the forest, as Firestar had done, and goes into the forest to find his friend. He is attacked by a border patrol, but Firestar arrives in time and calls the patrol off. Firestar then spends the night in Smudge's garden to better ascertain the will of SkyClan's elusive leader. Smudge is very relieved to learn that he does not have to live in the forest after all, and wishes his friend luck on his journey.


=== The New Prophecy Series ===
The New Prophecy series covers events in the story from Midnight to Sunset. Many characters here were first mentioned in the Original series, but had minor or insignificant roles. In addition, as with the Original series, most characters listed here play minor or significant roles in the following series, Power of Three, as well.


==== Midnight ====
Midnight is an elderly female badger first introduced in Midnight of The New Prophecy series. The journeying cats are initially quite surprised to discover that Midnight is actually a badger, as most badgers are hostile towards cats and several cats have been killed by them. Midnight reveals the true purpose of their journey by telling them that the forest is going to be destroyed. She later instructs the cats to return home through the mountains, resulting in the death of Feathertail. She later returns in Twilight to warn ThunderClan of an impending badger attack.
Midnight is shown to have connections with numerous spiritual entities, including StarClan and the Tribe of Endless Hunting. She is also known to be acquainted with Rock and Sol. Her knowledge of events occurring in the future and distant past is comparable to Rock, who also has near-omniscient knowledge of the cats' universe. She hints that there are many more communities of cats living in Clans and Tribes other than the forest cats, foreshadowing the introduction of the Tribe of Rushing Water. Midnight was aware of the Tribe's prophecy regarding Feathertail before she sent the cats to the mountains, effectively sending Feathertail to her death. She appeared in the prologue of Starlight. She is also capable of speaking and understanding the languages of many other animals, including cat, dog, fox, and rabbit, in addition to badger. Her last appearance is in Sunset. She did, however, made two appearances in Long Shadows, one in the prologue, where she is seen talking to the original leaders of the four Clans and then to Rock, and one while talking to Jayfeather in a dream. When Brambleclaw goes to find Midnight in Sunrise, they don't find her. Midnight does however, appear to Jayfeather in another dream.


==== Cody ====
A sweet, plucky, sleek, heavily-furred, and plump brown tabby kittypet and bright blue eyes, Cody was captured in The New Prophecy by Twolegs because her collar had been ripped off when she ran away from her housefolk (Twoleg owners), intending only to have a bit of fun before returning home, so the Twolegs mistook her for a wild cat. She became friends with Leafpool while they were held captive and woke her up from her depression. After being rescued by ThunderClan, she stayed for a while to look after Ferncloud's kit Birchkit. Before the Clans left the forest, Cody is forced to say goodbye to Leafpool, as although she was willing to help the clan in their hour of need, the life of a warrior cat was not for her, since she couldn't stand the blood and dying, and goes home to her owners.


==== Sasha ====
A tawny she-cat with bright blue eyes, darker brown-tipped ears, paws, muzzle, and tail with brown brindle stripes on her legs, Sasha (also called Brownie by a Twoleg) used to be a kittypet in her early days. But when her housefolk moved due to the death of the wife, Sasha was left on her own, venturing into ShadowClan territory. Her collar was taken off by Pine, another rogue. She caught sight of a patrol of Tigerstar, Jaggedtooth and Rowanclaw, calling Tigerstar "the big handsome tabby." He sees her in a tree, but does not tell his Clanmates. The next day, she leaps from her tree to give the frog that slipped out of Rowanclaw's claws to them. Tigerstar and Sasha begin speaking, and they soon meet every night. They have a bump in their relationship when Tigerstar discovers that Sasha is a kittypet, and he despises kittypets because of Firestar and that his father, Pinestar, had left him and his Clan to become a kittypet, so he does not come. But when he saves her from foxes, their relationship grows stronger, and he invites her to join ShadowClan. However, after she learns of his evil intentions to destroy all the Clans, she realizes he deceived her and rejects his offer.
She is the mother of Hawkfrost and Mothwing, and another kit, named Tadpole. She left Hawkfrost and Mothwing in RiverClan because she knew that Clan life wasn't for her, yet she wanted her kits to grow into warriors. Earlier, Tadpole, Hawk (Hawkfrost) and Moth (Mothwing) traveled away from their nest in order to find Ken. They got lost in the Twolegplace, and were trapped. Tadpole sacrificed his life in order to save his littermates.The place where they were trapped flooded and Tadpole drowned. She asked them to stay with her in the forest when the Clans were leaving, but they refused. It was revealed in a chat that Sasha is alive, still looking for her housefolk.


==== Smoky ====
A muscular gray and white tom, Smoky lives at the horseplace with Floss and formerly Daisy. He was first introduced in Starlight. He is the father of Daisy's kits, Berrynose, Mousewhisker, and Hazeltail, and (along with the other horseplace cats) refers to humans as 'Nofurs' instead of 'Twolegs'. Although he is the mate of both Daisy and Floss, Daisy knows that they care more for each other than they do for her. But in Sunrise when he meets Hazeltail, she tells him that Daisy has moved on; Smoky is saddened by this.


==== Floss ====
A small gray-and-white she-cat, Floss lives at the horseplace with Smoky, her mate. Her kits were all taken by the Twolegs; or as the horseplace cats call them, the Nofurs. Sister to Daisy, and aunt to Berrynose, Mousewhisker, Hazeltail,Toadstep and Rosepetal and great-aunt to Poppyfrost and Berrynose's kits, born at the end of "The Fourth Apprentice."


==== Sharptooth ====
A huge tawny mountain lion that terrified the Tribe of Rushing Water when the journeying cats met them. He was introduced in Moonrise, and has not appeared in any other books. Feathertail met her end driving a spike of rock into him, successfully killing him and fulfilling the prophecy that said: "A silver cat, not from this Tribe, will rid us of Sharptooth once and for all".


=== Power of Three Series ===
The Power of Three series covers events in the story from The Sight to Sunrise.


==== Brightspirit ====
Brightspirit is a deceased very young, beautiful silver tabby she-cat with dazzling green eyes mentioned in Long Shadows. She was created in memory of 10-year-old Warriors fan Emmy Grace Cherry, who died when a tornado struck her house in Russellville, Arkansas.
When ThunderClan was low on catmint she appeared in Jayfeather's dream and told him that catmint was where "wind was". After thinking about it, Jayfeather realized that it was in WindClan.


==== Flick ====
A skinny light brown tom with large pointed ears, Flick is one of the intruders invading the territory of the Tribe of Rushing Water in Outcast.


==== Flora ====
A dark brown-and-white she-cat with green eyes, Flora is one of the intruders invading the territory of the Tribe of Rushing Water in Outcast.


==== Sol ====
Sol is a tall, stocky, long-furred dark brown and bright tortoiseshell loner with pale yellow eyes, a face that tapers at the muzzle, a curving tail bushed at the tip, and large wide-spaced ears. He is a mysterious character introduced in Eclipse. He has knowledge of all four Clans (given to him by Midnight), despite none of them ever having seen him before. Sol predicts the forthcoming eclipse of the sun, an act that appears to be the beginnings of his attempt to convince the Clans that StarClan are not all-powerful. He later convinces Blackstar, who has already begun to lose faith in StarClan, to renounce his faith altogether and not allow his Clan to attend Gatherings.
Sol's character is, for the moment, ambiguous. He is polite, but not friendly. An attempt by Jayfeather to scan his mind results in a whirlwind of thoughts ranging locations far beyond any of the Clan territories, implying that this cat knows far more about the Clans' universe than he cares to reveal. He is also aware of the prophecy concerning Jayfeather, Lionblaze and Hollyleaf. Sol plays a large part in Long Shadows; his face is on the cover and in the excerpt he is seen attempting to convince the Clans to renounce faith in StarClan. It is mentioned in Long Shadows that Midnight told Sol all about StarClan and the four Clans, for a reason she will not disclose. Also, Hollyleaf has a nightmare in which she sees Sol blotting out the moon and her Clanmates crying out in fear. It is perhaps a sign that Sol will destroy all the Clans. In Long Shadows, when Hollyleaf runs into Sol on the lakeshore, he heads towards WindClan's territory where Ashfur's body is later found. Some people suspected him to be Ashfur's murderer rather than Squirrelflight, but Sol does not appear to have a motive. Additionally, when Jayfeather read Squirrelflight's mind following Ashfur's murder, she was afraid, seeming to confirm that she killed Ashfur, not Sol. But in the prologue of Sunrise, as Leafpool is examining Ashfur's body, she finds a tuft of black fur carrying Hollyleaf's scent, identifying Hollyleaf as the real killer. However, the rest of the Clan does not know this, so Ashfoot, the WindClan deputy, reveals to Brambleclaw that she saw Sol near where Ashfur's body was found. Upon hearing this, Firestar sent a patrol consisting of Brambleclaw, Brackenfur, Birchfall, Hazeltail, Lionblaze, and Hollyleaf. They search a large Twolegplace near the sun-drown-place and find a group of cats that Sol convinced to fight a wild pack of dogs that were threatening their home. After hearing the horrific story of their defeat, the new leader,Jingo, leads them to Purdy as Sol is staying with him. They find him and take him to the ThunderClan camp to be questioned by Firestar, with Purdy tagging along, becoming a ThunderClan elder. After being interrogated by Firestar, Sol is kept as a prisoner, but escapes when he lures Lionblaze to help him out by telling him he knows who his real father is. When the rest of the Clan finds out, it is rather a relief, because the other Clans were threatening Firestar, as they were nervous at the fact that someone like Sol was among them. Therefore, Firestar just told the other Clans that he banished Sol.
Afterwards, Hollyleaf, Lionblaze, and Jayfeather sneak away to find Sol at the old Twoleg nest, and Hollyleaf almost attacks him. Sol said they were "not ready to listen to him yet". They return, but it results in the same thing, except that Lionblaze gets angry with him, and they all vow to not return.
In "The Forgotten Warrior", Lionblaze finds Sol in the tunnels while trying to discover if Hollyleaf is dead or not. Sol goes to the ThunderClan camp and lies to the Clan, telling them that he saves Cherrypaw and Molepaw from a fox( Hollyleaf is the one that saves them). Berrynose, Poppyfrost, and the younger cats accept him. The older cats do not trust him but, Firestar allows Sol to stay with them. Dovewing and Ivypool do not trust him and while in the tunnels, hear him plotting with some WindClan cats, planning to attack ThunderClan through the tunnels. Dovewing and Ivypool are almost caught by WindClan but a cat saves them and reveals herself to be Hollyleaf. Lionblaze brings Hollyleaf to camp and she reveals that she is the one who saves Cherrypaw and Molepaw from the fox. Many cats, including Berrynose and Poppyfrost, grow furious with Sol and discover he has not returned to camp for a few days. Hollyleaf trains the cats in underground fighting, and with the training they defeat WindClan. Hollyleaf pins down Sol and tells him to never return and if he does, that she will kill him herself.
Sol is also a main character in the SkyClan and the Stranger manga series. He finds SkyClan, and begins to steal food from some foxes that live nearby, which makes Leafstar, the leader of SkyClan, angry with him. Soon, Leafstar decides to exile Sol from SkyClan, revealing that Sol does not know the Clans just because Midnight told him about them.


==== Stripes ====
A large silver tabby tom with dark stripes and amber eyes, Stripes is the leader of the intruders invading the territory of the Tribe of Rushing Water in Outcast. He is shown as a mocking, cruel cat, leading the intruders by no code of honor other than a life-or-death policy similar to BloodClan. At the end of the book, he and the other intruders are defeated by the Clan cats and the Tribe, and surrenders, promising to leave the Tribe alone and to respect their borders.


==== Twist ====
A young tortoiseshell she-cat with white stripes on her face, Twist is one of the intruders invading the territory of the Tribe of Rushing Water in Outcast. It is noted by Hollypaw that she is of apprentice age, and if she had been a Clan cat, they might have been friends. On a side note, during a Wands and Worlds chat, one fan asked if Twist would make another appearance. This was followed by Erin Hunter asking who Twist was. Therefore, it is assumed that Twist will not appear again.


==== Jingo ====
A dark brown tabby she-cat with the tip of her tail missing, Jingo is the leader that is trying to keep the band of Twolegplace cats together after Sol's dark leadership, introduced in Sunrise. When the wild dogs were chasing the ThunderClan cats, she found them and led them to safety in her abandoned Twoleg nest, and she led them back to were Purdy lives. Sol convinced Jingo to leave her housefolk and join his new Twolegplace "Clan", and she decided that it sounded exciting, and she told her neighbor, Flower, about this, too. Unfortunately, Flower was killed by the wild dogs while on a hunting mission.
When Sol was leader of the Twolegplace cats, he acted like their king, always asking them to bring him food, but never hunting himself. After Flower was killed, he devised a plan to show the dogs whose territory the nest was. He made it sound as if there was no other choice, and Pepper, Jester, and Frosty were killed as a result of his bad judgment, and all the cats had wounds, except for Sol, because he didn't raise a paw to help his cats. Soon after, Jingo asked him to leave.
Jingo is obviously a very emotionally strong character, as she had to deal with guilt from inviting Flower to join Sol, only for her to be killed. She also has to keep the shattered group together, and Lionblaze and Brambleclaw are impressed by this personality trait. Brambleclaw, as she is going back to the abandoned Twoleg nest, says, too softly for her to hear, "Goodbye, Jingostar. May StarClan light your path." This shows that he thinks she is as noble as a Clan leader.


==== Hussar ====
A broad-shouldered gray tom, Hussar has a long scar on his side from the fight with the wild dogs. He joined the Twolegplace "Clan" with Jingo, so they may be very good friends. Hussar is probably the strongest of the group, and therefore he acts as deputy to Jingo. He is rather calm, despite his size and strength, but shows an uncharacteristic hatred for Sol.


==== Speckle ====
A flecked brown she-cat, Speckle is nursing four kits, one of which is named Frisk. Her mate left when the wild dogs started to terrorize the lone cats in the abandoned Twoleg nest, but she is now in love with Sol, as she said she "wanted them [the kits] to be Sol's" and she would be "very glad to see him." She also defends Sol's reputation when they are discussing him with the Clan cats. She seems very protective of her kits and extremely suspicious of the Clan cats, perhaps because she knows they are looking for Sol, and when they find him it won't be for a friendly visit.


==== Fritz ====
Fritz is a small black and white tom with a torn ear from the dog fight. He is a very jumpy, soft-spoken cat. He is evidently friends with Jingo, or possibly mates, because he was comforting her when the subject of Flower came up, and vice versa when Fritz was scared. He was the first to meet the ThunderClan cats, near the edges of the Twolegplace, and tipped them off that Sol was nearby when he said, obviously scared to death of the Clan cats, "That's what he said! And look what happened!" They assumed that he was talking about Sol.


=== Pod ===
A scrawny brown tom with a scarred, gray muzzle, Pod is rather skittish, but he is very talkative and is not afraid to speak his mind, as opposed to Fritz. He complains quite a lot, and often insults things he hates, such as the dogs or Sol. It seems he has a grudge against Sol for acting as a leader among the Twolegplace cats, while he and his "Clanmates" went hungry and had to train nonstop for the fight against the dogs. Pod was one of the first to come to Sol's abandoned Twoleg nest, along with Fritz and Speckle.


==== Merry & Chirp ====
Merry is a ginger and white she-cat with green eyes, while Chirp is a pale gray tabby tom. They are the last of the Twolegplace cats to meet the ThunderClan patrol. Their appearance triggered all of the Twolegplace cats into hiding, thinking they were the dogs. When they arrive, Merry leaves soon after, muttering, "These cats are just like Sol." This signals she probably dislikes strangers, like everybody else in the abandoned Twoleg nest after Sol's leadership. But Chirp stays near the door. As he listens to the discussion, he gives the Clan cats very valuable information: there are rumors that Sol is back, and he is living with Purdy.


==== Flower ====
Flower was a beautiful young she-cat killed by the wild dogs. She was a former kittypet, and was Jingo's neighbor. Jingo convinced her to come with her to the abandoned Twoleg nest. Her death caused Sol to create a plan to fight the wild dogs, resulting in more deaths. Jingo misses Flower, and feels guilty about bringing her here to her death.


==== Pepper & Jet ====
Jet is a long-furred black tom, and Pepper is his littermate. Pepper was chosen by Sol to lead the dogs to the unused monster's den. But he never made it; the dogs outran him and killed him, then played with his body. After the battle, Sol walked in and asked Jet to bring him some food, and Jet would have killed Sol if Hussar had not held him back. Jet walked in while the Clan cats and the Twolegplace cats were discussing Sol, and he showed extreme anger towards Sol, saying to Jingo, "It's not okay. It'll never be okay. I don't want to think about that cat ever again!"


==== Jester & Frosty ====
Jester and Frosty were the two cats that died as a result of Sol's plan to fight the dogs. Jester was a tom that was so seriously wounded, he died from his injuries in the abandoned Twoleg nest. Frosty was a she-cat that was ripped to pieces by the dogs.


==== Oscar ====
Oscar is a kittypet that Firestar meets while searching for cats who would be willing to join the new SkyClan. He is grouchy and thinks that everything Firestar tells him is complete nonsense and refuses to join. He is described as a muscular black tom with green eyes.


==== Stick, Cora, Coal, Snowy, and Shorty ====
These five cats meet Firestar when he is traveling to rebuild SkyClan, and is separated from Sandstorm. Stick is a brown tom with yellow eyes and a torn ear, Cora is a black she cat with a ripped ear, Coal is a black tom with amber eyes and a long coat, Snowy is a pretty white she cat with bright blue eyes, and Shorty is a brown tabby tom with a stub for a tail and amber eyes. Shorty saves Sandstorm from some Twoleg kits, and then shows Firestar which way she went. In Dawn, there is a cat whose name is Coal in a twoleg nest, who may be the same Coal that was mentioned in Firestar's Quest. They are also seen in SkyClan's Destiny where they join SkyClan for a while. They leave after SkyClan helps them in the battle with Dodge, Stick's greatest enemy.


=== The Rise of Scourge ===


==== Socks ====
The brother of Scourge and Ruby and the son of Quince, Socks is a black tom with a white muzzle, tail tip, and paws. He, along with Ruby, tormented their younger brother Tiny into running away from home in The Rise of Scourge. However, he seems to have a less vicious personality than his sister. Later in the book, Socks and Ruby appear before Tiny, now Scourge, abandoned by their Twolegs and desperate for food and shelter. After a vengeful speech in which Scourge states that he no longer thinks of them as family, and indeed, doesn't think of family at all, he allows them to eat, but afterwards, he exiles them both. It was revealed in a Wands and Worlds chat with Erin Hunter on August 16, 2008, that Socks and Ruby are still alive.


==== Ruby ====
Scourge's sister, Ruby, along with her brother Socks, taunted and scared their brother Tiny enough so that he ran away from his Twoleg nest, by saying that Tiny was going to be thrown in the river because he "wasn't wanted." She and Socks were later adopted by housefolk, but were abandoned when they moved away. They came to Tiny (now Scourge), begging for assistance, but were soon turned away. It was revealed in a Wands and Worlds chat with Erin Hunter that they are still alive. She is described as a light gray she-cat.


==== Quince ====
Scourge's mother, Quince had one litter: Ruby, Socks, and Tiny (later Scourge). It is revealed in a Wands and Worlds chat with Erin Hunter that she is still alive, but is quite old. She mated with Firestar's father, although she is not his mother. She is described as a dark gray she-cat with a red collar and amber eyes.


=== Graystripe's Trilogy ===


==== Diesel ====
A light brown tabby tom with black zig-zag stripes and a white chest, paws, and muzzle, Diesel befriended Graystripe and Millie at a truck stop in Warrior's Return. When he met the duo, he offered them food and shelter. Millie accepted, while Graystripe was reluctant but was forced to accept the offer when shortly afterwards, Graystripe was hit by a car. Diesel suggested they get to the sun-drown-place by hitching a ride on a truck.


==== Duke ====
An unfriendly black-and-white tom with a spiked collar and nicks in his ears, Duke was first introduced in The Lost Warrior. One of the house cats in the surrounding Twolegplace where Graystripe lives for a while with the Twoleg family, he is leader of a small group of hostile kittypets. It is said that "no one defeats Duke", as he is a vicious fighter. Graystripe, weakened from his stay with the Twolegs, is defeated by him once, but later afterward Duke and his kittypet group are beaten themselves by Graystripe and Millie.


==== Husker ====
A long-haired dark gray tom with a lighter gray muzzle and a tuft of lighter gray fur on the top of his head, Husker is a patriarch of sorts of the family of barn cats Graystripe and Millie discovers in Warrior's Refuge. He is the mate of Moss and the father of Birdy, Pad, Raindrop, and Little Mew. He offers shelter to Millie and Graystripe after Millie's eyes are injured in the cornfield close to the barn where he and his family live. He explains that he and his family used to live with a family of kind, elderly Twolegs, but when they died, a new Twoleg family moved in and chased the cats away. He is seen playing with the Twolegs after Graystripe and Millie earn the Twolegs' gratitude for saving one of the Twoleg kits and lead them to the barn to meet the barn cats. It is assumed Husker becomes one of the Twolegs' kittypets afterward, as well as the rest of the family.


==== Moss ====
A slender black she-cat, Moss is the mate of Husker and the sister of Splash, as well as the mother of Birdy, Raindrop, Pad, and Little Mew. She is first introduced, along with the other barn cats, in Warrior's Refuge, and convinces Husker to let Graystripe and Millie shelter in the barn after Millie's eyes are injured from the cornfield. Due to Graystripe and Millie's saving one of the Twoleg kits, Moss and the rest of her family are accepted by the Twolegs in the end of the novel, and it is assumed that they have become their new kittypets.


==== Splash ====
A young black-and-white tom, Splash is the brother of Moss and is one of the barn cats in Warrior's Refuge. He maintains a minor role throughout the novel, and in the end is accepted by the Twolegs who were previously hostile to them. It is assumed that he and the rest of the barn cats have become their new kittypets.


=== Tigerstar and Sasha's Trilogy ===


==== Patch ====
Patch is a black-and-white kitten who was first introduced in Escape From the Forest. He would have drowned in the river if it hadn't been for Sasha alerting the captain of the boat in the river at that time. Over time, the captain started to grow fond of Patch. As the river froze, the captain was loading up a truck, but Sasha wouldn't get in, saying that she had to stay and told Patch to "take care of the captain." The captain said his goodbyes to Sasha, understanding she "was a wanderer," and left with Patch.


==== Pine ====
A battle-scarred, pale tom with dark markings running across his back, Pine is a loner outside the forest and befriended Sasha in her early days as a loner. He was first introduced in Into the Woods, the first novel in the Tigerstar and Sasha trilogy.


=== Ravenpaw's Path ===


==== Violet ====
Violet is Barley's sister, a cat originally mentioned in Secrets of the Clans. In the field guide, Violet is almost killed by Barley's (and therefore also her own) brothers Ice and Snake (born Jumper and Hoot), but Barley takes her to live with Fuzz, a kittypet. Violet is described as being a "tiny cat, pale orange with thin darker orange stripes" as well as with white paws.


== References ==