The Moon and the Sun is an upcoming American action-adventure fantasy film directed by Sean McNamara and written by Ronald Bass, Barry Berman, Laura Harrington, Bill Mechanic and James Schamus. It is based on the historical/sci-fi novel The Moon and the Sun (1997) by Vonda N. McIntyre. The film stars Pierce Brosnan as King Louis XIV, Kaya Scodelario as Marie-Josèphe, and Benjamin Walker as Yves De La Croix.
Principal photography began in early April 2014 in Versailles, France. Then production began on April 23 in Melbourne, Australia after a two weeks shoot in France. The shooting for the film wrapped-up in the end of May 2014. Paramount Pictures will release the film.


== SynopsisEdit ==
King Louis XIV's (Brosnan) quest for immortality leads him to capture and steal a mermaid's life force, a move that is further complicated by his illegitimate daughter's discovery of the creature.


== CastEdit ==
Pierce Brosnan as King Louis XIV
Kaya Scodelario as Marie-Josèphe
Benjamin Walker as Yves De La Croix
William Hurt as Père La Chaise
Fan Bingbing as Mermaid
Ben Lloyd-Hughes as Jean-Michel Lintillac
Paul Ireland as Benoit
Pablo Schreiber as Dr. Labarthe
Crystal Clarke as Magali
Rachel Griffiths as Abbess


== ProductionEdit ==
Cosmos Filmed Entertainment, in association with Bliss Media and Lightstream Pictures, will produce a film version of The Moon and the Sun in partnership with Kylin Network. Bill Mechanic of Pandemonium Films, James Pang (Painted Skin 2), Wei Han of Bliss Media and Paul Currie are also producing. The movie will star Pierce Brosnan as King Louis XIV; Chinese movie star, Fan Bingbing, as the mermaid; Kaya Scodelario as Marie-Joséphe; and William Hurt as Pere de Chaise (a character created for the movie). Filming will take place in Melbourne, Australia in April 2014, with two weeks of filming also planned in Versailles, France. Mechanic wrote the screenplay with the help of Barry Berman, James Schamus, Ellen Harrington and Ron Bass. Sean McNamara (Soul Surfer) is set to direct. The $40 million budget was co-financed by U.S. and Chinese sources. The film's rights were previously acquired by Universal's Focus Features, while international sales would be handled by Good Universe. On August 15, 2014, it was announced that Paramount Pictures acquired the US distribution rights to the film.


=== FilmingEdit ===
The principal photography on The Moon and the Sun began in early April 2014 on location at the Palace of Versailles in Versailles, France. And after the two weeks shoot in France, the production moved to Australia to shoot at Docklands Studios Melbourne and on location in Melbourne, Victoria and its surroundings. The filming commenced on April 23 in Melbourne, Docklands, and its surrounds. From May 6-8, the filming was taken place at Melbourne City Marina, on the Enterprize ship, for the recreation of a ship in a stormy Northern Sea at night in the year 1648. On May 2, 2014, the production was filming on location in Old Quad at The University of Melbourne, the set was transformed into a Versailles abbey. The filming wrapped-up in end of May 2014 in Australia.


== ReleaseEdit ==
On August 15, 2014, Paramount announced to release the film on April 10, 2015. Paramount cancelled the release date just three weeks before the film was set for a wide release and set for an unspecified date.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
The Moon and the Sun at the Internet Movie Database