Forest management is a branch of forestry concerned with the overall administrative, economic, legal and social aspects and with the essentially scientific and technical aspects, especially silviculture, protection, and forest regulation. This includes management for aesthetics, fish, recreation, urban values, water, wilderness, wildlife, wood products, forest genetic resources and other forest resource values. Management can be based on conservation, economics, or a mixture of the two. Techniques include timber extraction, planting and replanting of various species, cutting roads and pathways through forests, and preventing fire.


== What is forest management ==
The forest is a natural system that can supply different products and services. The working of this system is influenced by the natural environment: climate, topography, soil, etc., and also by human action. The actions of man in forests constitute the forest management. In developed societies this management tends to be elaborated and planned, in order to achieve the objectives that are considered desirable.
Some forests have been and are managed to obtain the traditional forest products: fire wood, fiber for paper, building timber, with little thinking for other products and services. Nevertheless, as a result from the development of ecology science and environmental awareness, management of forests for multiple use is becoming more common. In Britain, Ireland and elsewhere in Europe, and approach to sustainable forest management that is particularly effective for delivering a diverse range of benefits is Continuous Cover Forestry.


== Public input and awareness ==
There has been an increased public awareness of natural resource policy, including forest management. Public concern regarding forest management may have shifted from the extraction of timber for earning money for the economy, to the preservation of additional forest resources, including wildlife and old growth forest, protecting biodiversity, watershed management, and recreation. Increased environmental awareness may contribute to an increased public mistrust of forest management professionals. But it can also lead to greater understanding about what professionals do re forests for nature conservation and ecological services. The importance of taking care of the forests for ecological as well as economical sustainable reasons has been shown in the TV show Ax Men.
Many tools like GIS modelling have been developed to improve forest inventory and management planning.


== Wildlife considerations ==
The abundance and diversity of birds, mammals, amphibians and other wildlife are affected by strategies and types of forest management.


== Management intensity ==
Forest management varies in intensity from a leave alone, natural situation to a highly intensive regime with silvicultural interventions. Management is generally increased in intensity to achieve either economic criteria (increased timber yields, non-timber forest products, ecosystem services) or ecological criteria (species recovery, fostering of rare species, carbon sequestration).


== See also ==


== References ==