Codename: Kids Next Door Operation: V.I.D.E.O.G.A.M.E. (Villains In Detention Escape Outpost Growing Amalgamation Mega Enormously) is a 2005 platformer video game based on the American animated television series Codename: Kids Next Door. It was released for the Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, and PlayStation 2 in North America, Europe, and Australia.


== Plot ==
One day the KND are playing a videogame. While Numbuh 2 gives Numbuh 1 a training simulation helmet, which according to Numbuh 2 "a numbuh one size fits all." Then, the Toilenator shows up and ties up the rest of the team, while Numbuh 1 thinks this is a simulation, not the real thing. So after he defeats the "simulated" Toilenator, he decides to throw him out the window, which he also thinks is simulated.
After Numbuh 1 frees the team, and they inform him that it was, in fact real, Numbuh 86 reports. The most dangerous villains the KND has fought have escaped from the maximum security prison. Numbuh 86 states that the other KND sectors are at the beach. Numbuh 1 makes his way through the Sprinkle Puff Donut Shoppe through a giant oven, a giant fan, a river of dough, and finally confronting Gramma Stuffum and her Chuck Wagon in her lair. After he defeats Gramma Stuffum, a mysterious person steals the engine core from the Chuck Wagon.
Then Numbuh 1 gets a call from Numbuh 4. The KND Treehouse is covered in snot. Numbuh 1 thinks the Common Cold has invaded the treehouse.
So it's up to Numbuh 5 to get through the snot infested to try and turn off the Treehouse Security Systym, defeat the Flu Bugs and watchbots and free Numbuh 4.
When Numbuh 4 achieves this, the Common Cold introduces his Snot Bomber,which happens to be floating outside the treehouse. Numbuh 2 appears piloting the KND C.O.O.L.B.U.S, which he uses to chase the Common Cold through the countryside, city and finally confronting the Snot Bomber at the beach. Afterwards the same mysterious person appears in a jetpack and takes the power core from the Snot Bomber, causing it to plummet to the ground, but Numbuh 2 didn't notice this because he was trying to pick up the phone he dropped.
That night, Numbuh 4 had to go to the toilet. While Numbuh 4 was at the toilet, the power went off and one-by-one, Count Spankulot turned the KND into vampires. All except for Numbuh 4, who was at the toilet and had a little "accident" on his shoes.
When Numbuh 4 found out about his team mates,he travelled through the treehouse to find and defeat them. Numbuh 1 had the power also to multiply into 2 fakes and one real.
When the KND were all reformed, they worked on catching all the hamsters to repower the treehouse. This tired them all out, except for Numbuh 3, who thought this as a game. So Numbuh 3 was assigned to catch all the hamsters throughout the treehouse and reestablish the power core.
When Numbuh 3 achieved this Numbuh 1 decided to strike back at Count Spankulot. Numbuh 1 went out and browsed the neighborhood to free children, defeat Count Spankulot's minions, and to confront Count Spankulot himself at the School Clocktower after a myriad of enemies.
After Count Spankulot's defeation, Numbuh 86 reports again. He states that while the KND were having their spanking party, Stickybeard was leading the Sweet Revenge for all the sweets in the world. But because of Numbuh 4's curiosity of pressing buttons the mission was suspended to defeat pirates to gain engine blocks to fix the T.A.R.P.O.O.N.
Once the T.A.R.P.O.O.N. was fixed the KND could get on with their misson, Numbuh 2 used the T.A.R.P.O.O.N. on Stickybeard's ship. Numbuh 5 slid along the T.A.R.P.O.O.N. rope to the ship.
Numbuh 5 then had to make her way through the ship, defeating all of the pirates she came across and finally confronting Stickybeard in his candy treasury room. Once Stickybeard is defeated the mysterious person reveals herself as Cree a former KND worker who now works for the Delightful Children From Down the Lane and Father, then kicks Stickybeard on top of Numbuh 5.
Afterwards, Knightbrace's toothpaste 'Bug Brite' made from fireflies had to be stopped. Numbuh 3 had to browse the neighborhood for fireflies to burn through the garden fences to where the fireflies were being held captive, the School Clocktower. From here, Numbuh 3 must use fireflies not being held captive to burn the jar lids open. This leaves a glow from the tower once the fireflies leave.
The fireflies freed show the location of Knightbrace's Cavity Cave, from where Numbuh 1 must find the passcodes to open the path to Knightbrace's lair. Once here, Numbuh 1 will have to cross a river of pure floride and get to a Dentadrone spawner to short circuit the entrance to Knightbrace's lair. Once in the lair, Numbuh 1 finds Knightbrace in his Dental Assault Chair.
After Numbuh 1 defeats Knightbrace, Numbuh 4 finds the Toilenator. So Numbuh 4 has to make his way through the flooding treehouse, defeating the Toilenator's new henchmen, Scrummy Mummies and Poohemoths, to his room. Numbuh 4 challenges the Toilenator to a race to Numbuh 4's toilet. When Numbuh 4 wins, the Toilenator is sent to the C.O.O.L.B.U.S with the other villains.
The KND begin to take off after they have checked the villains. Since they're all there,the KND blast off for the moon in the C.O.O.L.B.U.S. While they're up there, Numbuh 2 mistakes the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion for the Moon. The KND must defeat all the Assault Satilities and the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion to get to the moon and deliver the villains.
Once the KND have achieved this,the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion sends out a beam which teleports the villains to the moon and merges them. When the T.R.E.E.H.E.M.O.T.H beats the amalgamation of villains, an explosion sending the villains flying. In the treehouse Numbuh 3 says that they could sneak as Numbuh 4 repeats that sneaking is not a good idea. Then the Toiletnator shows up and will get his revenge.


== Reception ==
The game received generally mixed to negative ratings. IGN rated it poorly, 4.0 out of 10, criticizing its bad camera angles and unreliable controls.


== References ==