The Quad St. Charles (Formerly Charlestowne Mall) is a two-story shopping mall located in St. Charles, Illinois.
The mall's anchor stores include Von Maur (formerly JCPenney), Carson Pirie Scott and Kohl's.


== History ==
Charlestowne Mall was built on the far east side of St. Charles. It opened in 1991. The mall boasted an Italian made double decked carousel in the food court. The mall also featured over 120 retail stores and 4 anchors.
Major changes to the mall include the construction of the Regal Cinemas on the Northwest Anchor slot of the mall (now Classic Cinemas). In 2001, JCPenney closed their location, which became Von Maur a year later.
The Mall has a similar design to the Danbury Fair Mall and the Freehold Raceway Mall


=== New Ownership ===
In June 2010, a California-based investment group acquired the mall with plans to revitalize it. However, as of early 2012, there were numerous vacancies in the mall. While marketing and signage have advertised the construction of an indoor ice rink and a large sushi and seafood buffet., After over a year later there have been no indications of communication between mall ownership and the city in terms of beginning construction for these projects, On January 4, 2011, Sears announced that their Charlestowne location would close before April 3, 2011 after negotiations between the new mall management company and Sears officials broke down, leaving only Carson Pirie Scott, Kohl's, and Von Maur the remaining anchor stores. Sears shut its doors for the last time on March 20, 2011.
After two years of no contact with the mall's ownership, city officials stated a plan in 2012 to spend $35,000 on a study to determine the best options for the mall site.


=== The Krauz Companies Take Over ===
In mid August the abandoned mall was put under contract to be sold by Mark Goodman & Associates. They hoped to close on the property as soon as mid September, according to the Daily Herald. A full presentation of the future plans of the mall was to be given to the city within the next 30–45 days they stated. "Goodman said his group 'absolutely' intends to keep the mall property as some form of a shopping center." 
On November 14, 2013 The Krausz Companies Inc acquired the mall property and renamed it from Charlestowne Mall, to The Quad St. Charles. The new owners are to demolish the current Sears wing of the mall and completely remodel the interior and exterior of the mall. "The inspiration for The Quad name centers on the "neighborhood feeling" the company is trying to bring to the mall through a redesign. Outdoor patio dining and exterior merchandised retails will be part of the mall for the first time. There will also be a 'welcoming center' with a fireplace as the key attraction for families and shoppers to gather. The existing abundant natural light will be retained in the new environment" said Krausz Executive Vice President Jay E. Krigsman. Construction is expected to start in April 2014, and be completed by Fall 2015.  The mall's famous 2 level Italian carousel was also put up for sale due to there being no room for it in the malls new floor plan. As of April 2014 the only true tenant left in the mall is Lenscrafters (excluding anchor stores). Lenscrafters, the anchor stores, and the cinema are to stay open during construction.
A groundbreaking ceremony was held in August of 2014, and mass earthworks are in process at the site preparing for the redevelopment of the main mall buildings. Updating the city council in April of 2015, representatives of Krausz shared that the project is proceeding with a grand reopening contemplated for 2016.
At the end of May 2015, the carousel was disassembled.


== References ==


== External links ==
Charlestowne Mall Website
Official Quad St. Charles Website
Deadmalls.com Feature: Charlestowne Mall