Tortricidae is a family of moths, commonly known as tortrix moths or leafroller moths, in the order Lepidoptera. Tortricidae is a large family with over 10,350 species described, and is the sole member of the superfamily Tortricoidea., although the genus Heliocosma is sometimes placed within this superfamily. Many of these are economically important pests. Olethreutidae is a junior synonym. The typical resting posture is with the wings folded back producing a rather rounded profile.
Notable tortricids include the codling moth and the spruce budworm, which are among the most well-studied insects on the planet because of their economic impact.


== Some common Tortricids ==
The Tortricids include many economically important pests, including :-
Summer fruit tortrix moth (Adoxophyes orana)
Fruit tree tortrix moth (Archips podana)
Rose leaf roller (Archips rosana)
Argyrotaenia ljungiana, a pest on vines, maize and fruit trees
Peach moth (Cydia molesta)
Codling moth (Cydia pomonella)
Plum fruit moth (Cydia funebrana)
Pea moth (Cydia nigricana)
Chestnut and acorn moth (Cydia splendana)
Light brown apple moth (Epiphyas postvittana)
Hemp borer (Grapholita delineana)
Oriental fruit moth (Grapholita molesta)
Cherry fruitworm (Grapholita packardi)
European grapevine moth (Lobesia botrana)
Barred fruit tree tortrix moth (Pandemis cerasana)
Grape berry moth (Paralobesia viteana)
Long-palped tortrix (Vine leaf roller) (Sparganothis pilleriana)
Bud moth (Spilonota ocellana)
False codling moth (Thaumatotibia (Cryptophlebia) leucotreta)
Spruce budworm (Genus Choristoneura)
See also Mexican jumping bean moth (Cydia deshaisiana)


=== A typical tortricid - the codling moth ===
Tortricidae is considered to be the single most important family of insects that feed on apples, both economically and in diversity of feeding found on fruit, buds, leaves and shoots. In New York state, no fewer than 17 species of Tortricidae have gained pest status in regards to apple production.
The codling moth Cydia pomonella causes worm-holes in apples. It has been accidentally spread from its original range in Europe and is now found in North and South America, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand wherever apples are grown. Control has required the use of the harshest available insecticides - historically lead arsenate and DDT were used for control. These chemicals brought considerable environmental dangers, and in any case the insect gradually developed resistance to them. Currently organophosphate sprays are favored and are timed carefully to catch the hatching larvae before they can bore into the fruit.


== See also ==
List of Tortricidae genera


== References ==
Firefly Encyclopedia of Insects and Spiders, edited by Christopher O'Toole, ISBN 1-55297-612-2, 2002


== External links ==
British Tortricoid Moths.
Tortricid.net
Family Tortricidae at Lepidoptera.pro
Eurasian Tortricidae
Tortricid Fauna of Apple In New York.(LEPIDOPTERA: TORTRICIDAE): Including An Account Of Apples' Occurrence In The State, Especially As A Naturalized Plant, written by P.J. Chapman and S.E. Link, Geneva: New York State Agricultural Experiment Station, 1971
Rhyacionia frustrana, Nantucket pine tip moth on the UF / IFAS Featured Creatures Web site