EDF Energy is an integrated energy company in the United Kingdom, with operations spanning electricity generation and the sale of gas and electricity to homes and businesses throughout the United Kingdom. It employs 13,158 people and handles 5.7 million customer accounts.


== History ==
EDF Energy Customers (trading as EDF Energy) is wholly owned by the French state-owned EDF SA (Électricité de France) and was formed in 2002 following the acquisition and mergers of SEEBOARD Plc (formerly the South Eastern Electricity Board), London Electricity Plc (formerly the London Electricity Board or LEB), SWEB Energy Plc (formerly the South Western Electricity Board) and two coal-fired power stations and a combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) power station.
In 2009, EDF Energy took control of the UK nuclear generator, British Energy, buying share capital from the government. This made EDF Energy one of the UK's largest generators, as well as the largest distribution network operator.
The Development Branch of EDF Energy was formed in April 2004, bringing together the separate infrastructure interests of what were LE Group, SEEBOARD and SWEB. The focus for the Branch is development activity through the participation in major new infrastructure projects, largely in the public sector through Public-private partnership (PPP) and Private Finance Initiative (PFI) type schemes. The Development Branch of EDF Energy was later dissolved in October 2006.
The electricity distribution (or downstream) networks formally known as EDF Energy Networks were sold in Nov 2010 to Hong Kong-based Cheung Kong Group (CKG), owned by billionaire Li Ka Shing. Later, EDF Energy Networks was renamed to UK Power Networks.
In December 2014, EDF sold three small UK-based wind farms with a combine capacity of 73 megawatts to the China General Nuclear Power Group for an estimated £100 million.


== No Dash For Gas action ==
In February 2013 EDF Energy sought an estimated £5 million in damages from environmental activists from the No Dash for Gas campaign who occupied the EDF-owned West Burton CCGT power station in October 2012, and pleaded guilty to charges of aggravated trespass. It is unusual in the UK for companies to seek damages from protesters. Environmentalist George Monbiot, writing in the Guardian, said EDF was conducting a strategic lawsuit against public participation, "part of a global strategy by corporations to stifle democracy", and predicted the "disastrous unintended consequences of an attempt at censorship" could result in the Streisand effect and be comparable to the McLibel case. The activists received support in the days since the case became public with over six thousand signatures on a supportive petition at Change.org within the first day, and over 64,000 by the time EDF dropped their lawsuit on 13 March 2013, saying that this was "a fair and reasonable solution" after the protesters had "agreed in principle to accept a permanent injunction which prevents them from entering multiple sites operated by EDF Energy".


== Electricity generation ==


=== Fossil fuel ===

EDF owns two 2,000 MW coal-fired power stations, Cottam and West Burton, both located near Retford in Nottinghamshire, giving EDF the highest coal-fired generational capacity of any energy company in the UK. It also owns the 790 MW Sutton Bridge CCGT power station, and constructed a new 1,311 MW CCGT station at West Burton,which opened in 2011.


=== Wind ===
EDF also owns and operates 2 wind farms, at Kirkheaton in Northumberland and the High Hedley Hope wind farm near Tow Law in County Durham, and is developing the Teesside Offshore Wind near Redcar, Teesside.


=== Nuclear ===
Following the acquisition of British Energy in 2009, the EDF Energy portfolio includes eight nuclear power stations. They are seven AGR power stations (Dungeness B; Hinkley Point B; Hunterston B; Hartlepool; Heysham 1; Heysham 2 & Torness) and one PWR power station (Sizewell B) and total nearly 9000MW of installed capacity.
In 2007 EDF announced its intention to construct up to 4 new EPR reactors; two at Hinkley Point C (possibly by 2018 [1]) and two at Sizewell C. EDF plans to build and operate the new plants through its subsidiary NNB Generation Company (NNB GenCo).
In August 2014, the company announced it had shut down 4 of its 15 reactors for a period of eight weeks to investigate potential cracking in the boiler spine.


=== Renewable energy ===
The Ecologist magazine reported that in 2004 EDF Energy spent virtually nothing on the construction of new renewable energy generation. On their website EDF reports that it is currently investing GBP 2 million in Marine Current Turbines, which use tidal power to generate electricity; however, these turbines are still at the research and prototype phase and EDF expect them to be operational "within the next five years" dependent upon "a successful pilot." EDF also has several ongoing renewable developments in windfarms.
In 2007 EDF had an installed renewable energy generating capacity of 1.8MW, representing 0.08% of their total capacity of approximately 4,865MW.
In June 2008 EDF announced the formation of EDF Energy Renewables, a 50:50 joint venture with EDF Energies Nouvelles, with the stated intention of becoming a 'major force in the UK renewable energies market'.
In July 2009, Ecotricity started legal proceedings against EDF Energy for the alleged misuse of the Green Union Flag logo, used to promote the Team Green Britain campaign.
In 2013, the 62 MW offshore Teesside Wind Farm started operation.


=== Carbon intensity ===


== Sponsorship ==

EDF Energy has sponsored several ITV shows, including Soapstar Superstar and City Lights. It also sponsored coverage of the 2006 World Cup in Germany (shared with Budweiser).
Since 2005, EDF Energy has been the main sponsor of the EDF Energy Cup – the Rugby Union domestic cup for the 12 English Premiership clubs and the 4 Welsh regions – also known as the Anglo-Welsh Cup. In July 2007 EDF Energy was confirmed as another Level One sponsor for London 2012 with exclusive branding rights and Olympic team sponsorship for the 2008, 2010 and 2012 games as well as being the official energy provider.
In August 2008 EDF Energy formed a partnership with The British Red Cross to help vulnerable people to get support during power failures.
In 2007 EDF Energy sponsored Adam Smith. In June 2009 EDF Energy sponsored Justin Bieber. On 3 November 2011 EDF Energy sponsored Laura Waura.
In January 2011 EDF Energy took over sponsorship from British Airways of the London Eye, on a 3-year deal renaming the London Eye as the EDF Energy London Eye.


== Marketing ==
On 4 January 2008 EDF Energy began advertising on the television through ITV, Channel 4, Five and various Satellite channels. EDF Energy are using "It's not easy being green" as their slogan to target a new greener eco-friendly image. In 2009, with Euro RSCG London, EDF Energy created the Team Green Britain campaign, in which Olympic athletes encouraged Britons to be more environmentally aware.
On 2 April 2012 EDF Energy launched an advert including their new mascot Zingy.


== Distribution network operators ==
EDF Energy is an energy supplier for homes across the country. They do not however manage the network of towers and cables that distributes electricity - these are maintained by distribution network operators (DNOs) which vary from region to region. If, for instance, there is a power outage it is necessary to contact the appropriate DNO rather than the energy supplier. See entry on distribution network operator for a full list.


== EDF Energy's main locations ==
EDF Energy's main offices are located in London, Crawley and Barnwood.


== See also ==

Energy policy of the United Kingdom
Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom
Green electricity in the United Kingdom


== References ==


== External links ==
EDF Energy