The Griffin Pirate Stories are a collection of books written as a scheme for primary schools during the 1970s-1980s by Sheila K McCullagh. The books spanned 2 series numbering 20 titles in total, though a separate stand alone book entitled "Pirate I Spy" was also released as part of the same scheme. The central characters are three pirates:
Benjamin the Blue (called 'Ben' for short) - the heroic one. He is the only one of the three pirates to differ appearance-wise from the other two - he has blond hair instead of black, he is clean shaven, he wears a Headscarf instead of a black Bicorne, and is the only one of the three pirates to wear merely a shirt, and no jacket. His shirt and trousers are even, unlike the other two pirates, different shades of blue - his shirt is a light shade of blue, and his trousers are a darker shade. However, he wears black boots, which the other two pirates wear. Since he wears blue (and, all three pirates' names are alliterations, to match the colours they wear), his favourite diamonds and jewels are blue sapphires.
Roderick the Red (called 'Rod' for short) - the stout one. He wears a black Bicorne and boots, and sports black hair and a black handlebar moustache. He wears a red jacket and trousers, and black boots. Since he wears red, his favourite diamonds and jewels are red rubies.
Gregory the Green (called 'Greg' for short) - the lanky one. He wears a wide brimmed hat and black boots, and, like Roderick the Red, sports black hair and a black handlebar moustache. He wears a dark green jacket and trousers, and black boots. Since he wears green, his favourite diamonds and jewels are green emeralds.


== Books ==
Series 1
1 The Three Pirates
2 The Blue Pirate Sails
3 Roderick the Red
4 Gregory the Green
5 The Storm
6 The Three Pirates Meet
7 The Griffin
8 On the Island
9 The Mirror, the Candle and the Flute
10 The Fight with the Black Pirates
11 The Island of the Mer-people
12 Acrooacree
Series 2
13 Pirate and Mer-King
14 The Black Pirates and the Silver Net
15 On the Way to the Black Cliff
16 The Caves of Alorn
17 The White Cat
18 The Breaking of the Chain
19 The Stolen Ship
20 Alorn's Treasure
Stand alone title
Pirate I Spy Book


== External links ==
http://schoolreading70sbooks.weebly.com/the-three-pirates-griffin-and-little-dragons.html