LifeTimes is an album by Diana Hubbard, released in 1979 by Waterhouse Records 8. In addition to Diana Hubbard, the album includes musical contributions from Chick Corea, Stanley Clarke, John Goodsall, Michael Boddicker, and Patrick Moraz. Diana is the daughter of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard and his wife Mary Sue Hubbard. Born in London in 1952, by age 6 she was composing sonatas for piano. She took courses in music at the Royal Academy, but left at age 15 to work in the Scientology organization for her father. She rose to senior positions within the organization, and became a member of the elite group the Sea Org. While working in the United States as a spokesperson for the Church of Scientology, she was discovered backstage at an event sponsored by the organization, performing one of her original compositions. She was convinced to record some of her music in 1976, and Jimmie Spheeris later persuaded her to record the album LifeTimes in 1979.
In an interview about the album with The Harvard Crimson, Diana explained she wanted to compose music that "is felt but not heard". Hubbard told the St. Petersburg Times, "My music is for intelligent listeners, who don't mind if I change chords, and are willing to see what happens next." The album received a negative review in The Harvard Crimson, which referred to it as music, "for the dentist's office". The Milwaukee Journal called the album "peaceful, attractive music". Billboard highlighted the album in its column, "Billboard's Top Album Picks", in the section "First Time Around". The Sarasota Herald-Tribune called LifeTimes, "an instrumental with a medieval quality".


== ArtistEdit ==
Diana Hubbard was born in London, the daughter of the founder of Dianetics and Scientology, L. Ron Hubbard. She was born Diana Meredith DeWolf Hubbard on September 24, 1952, to L. Ron Hubbard and his wife Mary Sue Hubbard. She was the first child born to Mary Sue and L. Ron Hubbard. She composed sonatas for piano at age 6. She attended the Royal Academy, where she took courses in ballet and music. In her early years as a teenager, she took executive courses in Scientology at Saint Hill Manor along with her brother, Quentin Hubbard. Her other siblings include Suzette and Arthur. At the age of 15, she left the Royal Academy, in order to serve within the Scientology organization and assist her father. During the bulk of her teenage years, she lived most of her life on her father's yacht, located in the Mediterranean. By age 16, she rose to the rank of Lieutenant Commander within the elite Scientology group called the Sea Org. She became a spokesperson for the branch of the Church of Scientology within the United States in 1969. In 1979, Hubbard lived with her husband audiophile Jonathan Horwich and her daughter Roanne, in Clearwater, Florida. In 1980, she served as an executive within the Church of Scientology, and in 2001 she maintained a leadership position within the organization.


== InspirationEdit ==
According to the Sarasota Herald-Tribune, Hubbard was discovered when she performed one of her original pieces backstage, at an event sponsored by the organization, while working as a representative in the United States for the Church of Scientology. She was convinced to record a few tapes of her music in 1976. LifeTimes was recorded in 1979.
In an interview about the album with The Harvard Crimson, Diana Hubbard explained her motivation and inspiration for the album. She said she wanted to compose music that "is felt but not heard", and attempted to revitalize the romantic aspects to jazz. She said that her work was "not trying to be any structured thing. In all of us we have the dreamer".
Hubbard characterized her composition style as "impressionistic paintings in music", in an interview with the St. Petersburg Times. She commented, "My music is for the time when people want to turn out the lights, listen and escape into another world ... to dream places ... to little magical places in which the listener can participate and become involved." Regarding a potential audience, Hubbard said, "My music is for intelligent listeners, who don't mind if I change chords, and are willing to see what happens next." Explaining why written text did not accompany the songs, Hubbard said, "I wrote lots of poetry. But somehow it didn't feel right to have lyrics with the pieces – I'd rather leave that slot open for the listener."
She wrote liner notes for each piece in the album, describing exactly what type of vision she was attempting to evoke with her compositions. For her description of the first track on the album, "Rose Coloured Lights", Hubbard wrote that the picture she was trying to bring about for the listener was "a yacht in the Mediterranean. Leaning over a rail at night thinking. The whole spectrum of love: the champagne of c'est la vie in a million stories..."


== ProductionEdit ==
The album was produced by an independent label, Waterhouse Records 8. Waterhouse Records was based in Minnesota, and at the time of the album's release it was available by mail order from Minneapolis. It includes performances from musicians Chick Corea and Stanley Clarke – both Scientologists. Other noteworthy contributors include Patrick Moraz and Denny Seiwell. Musical artist Jimmie Spheeris persuaded Hubbard to record the album, and also served as its executive producer. The string portions were written by David Campbell.
Hubbard wrote all of the music for the album, with contributors utilizing instruments including synthesizers, bass, woodwinds, strings, and a bouzouki. She plays piano on the album. Most of the pieces on the album are of three to four minutes in duration. Wayne Isaak served as the Waterhouse Records publicist for the album. In publicity for the album, marketing compared Hubbard's musical writing style to that of Erik Satie. The album cover was marketed with a sticker on the outside wrapping advertising the fact that it was endorsed by Stanley Clarke.


== ReceptionEdit ==
Billboard highlighted the album in its column, "Billboard's Top Album Picks", in the section "First Time Around". Billboard described the album as "a light classics pop LP" and noted, "The music is mostly soft and pretty drawing from many ethnic sources." The Sarasota Herald-Tribune described the album as "an instrumental with a medieval quality in the all-encompassing and sometimes mysterious sound of strings, piano and rhythm section. The repetitive phrasing and rolling melody are synthesized tone and nuance." The St. Petersburg Times described Hubbard's piano compositions as "fresh, haunting melodies".
In a review of the album for The Harvard Crimson, Thomas M. Levenson wrote, "Hubbard's music does not, as a result, offend the listener. It's not execrable. It is just extraordinarily dull. As a pianist/composer, Hubbard sounds like Bruckner rewritten for the dentist's office." Don Lewis reviewed the album for The Milwaukee Journal, and commented, "It's peaceful, attractive music, even though, after a while, it sounds like many of Miss Hubbard's compositions are swatches from the same bolt of cloth."


== Track listingEdit ==
LifeTimes
All music composed by Diana Hubbard.


== PersonnelEdit ==
Musicians
Diana Hubbard – piano
Chick Corea – synthesizers
Michael Boddicker – synthesizers
Stanley Clarke – string bass
Patrick Moraz – synthesizer
John Goodsall - guitars
Ric Parnell - drums
David Campbell – violas
Jim Cowger – woodwinds
Dennis Karmazyn – cello
Al Hendrickson – bouzouki
Denny Seiwell – drums
Johnny Pierce – bass


== ReferencesEdit ==


== Further readingEdit ==
"Diana Hubbard". The Music Journal 38 (1–5): 65. 1980. 


== External linksEdit ==
LifeTimes, information at musicstack.com
LifeTimes by Diana Hubbard, at artistdirect.com