The sheet bend (also known as becket bend, weaver's knot and weaver's hitch) is a bend, that is, a knot that joins two ropes together. Doubled, it is effective in binding lines of different diameter or rigidity securely together, although it has a tendency to work loose when not under load.
The sheet bend is related in structure to the bowline. It is very fast to tie, and along with the bowline and clove hitch is considered so essential it is knot №1 in the Ashley Book of Knots. It is a more secure replacement for the reef knot (square knot), especially in its doubled variety.
The "weaver's knot" takes its common name from its historic use in textile mills. Even in modern operations, weavers are taught to use this particular knot when correcting broken threads in the warp. In practice, weavers are taught to be able to tie the knot in as little time possible, with the mean average being no more than three to five seconds.


== MethodEdit ==

The sheet bend may be tied by various methods: the basic "rabbit through the hole" method of forming a half hitch in the bight of the larger rope, by a more expedient method shown in Ashley as №1431 (similar to the method used by an experienced sailor or mountaineer to tie a bowline) or by a trick method, Ashley №2562, involving upsetting a noose knot over a short end of the "larger" rope. (Lines of equal size may be joined with a sheet bend, of course, but when one is larger, it plays the simpler role of the red line shown in the infobox, rather than forming the nipped hitch as the green line does.)
One type of weaver's knot is topologically equivalent to a sheet bend, but is tied (usually in smaller stuff) with a different approach. Sheet bends are also used for netting.

Notice that, to have any strength, the two free ends should end up on the same side of the knot (see below). Under even moderate load, a left-hand sheet bend will quickly slip and release completely.


== Double sheet bendEdit ==
When lines are of unequal diameter or rigidity it is necessary for security to "double" the sheet bend by making an additional round turn below the first and again bringing the working end back under itself. The free ends should end up on the same side of the knot for maximum strength.


== See alsoEdit ==
List of bend knots
List of knots


== ReferencesEdit ==