Floods of Fear is a 1959 British thriller film directed by Charles Crichton and starring Howard Keel, Anne Heywood and Harry H. Corbett.  Its plot is about a convict framed for murder who escapes during a flood and aids a woman in distress.
Howard Keel recalled the filming in his autobiography Only Make Believe: My Life in Show Business: "All the flood scenes were filmed on one of the large stages at Pinewood Studios. The water had to be both dirty and cold, and it was. They couldn't heat it for fear it might get rancid. That was another tough picture. Anne Heywood never once protested about the water. [Charles] Crichton, who had a great sense of humor, had directed some very funny pictures. Cyril Cusack and I were good friends. We had a little contest over Anne. He was a real cutie, as well as a hell of an actor, but I won out." 


== Cast ==
Howard Keel as Donovan
Anne Heywood as Elizabeth Matthews
Cyril Cusack as Peebles
Harry H. Corbett as Sharkey
John Crawford as Jack Murphy
Eddie Byrne as Sheriff
John Phillips as Dr. Matthews
Mark Baker as Watchman
James Dyrenforth as Mayor
Jack Lester as Businessman
Peter Madden as Banker
Guy Kingsley Poynter as Deputy Sheriff
Gordon Tanner as Lt-Colonel
Robert Mackenzie as Police Captain
Vivian Matalon as Farmer
Gordon Sterne as Farmer
Bill Edwards as 1st Deputy
Graydon Gould as 2nd Deputy
Kevin Scott as 3rd Deputy
Ed Devereaux as Sergeant


== Critical reception ==
TV Guide wrote, "Heywood is a joy to watch as she stands up to the impending aquatic doom" ; while the Radio Times wrote, "well performed by an able cast Dallas star Howard Keel, Steptoe and Son's Harry H Corbett, Cyril Cusack and, in particular, damsel in distress Anne Heywood this is typical, and unremarkable, British 1950s B-movie fare." 


== References ==
^ folsominc2 (12 February 1959). "Floods of Fear (1958)". IMDb. 
^ "Floods of Fear". BFI. 
^ "Floods of Fear". Turner Classic Movies. 
^ "Floods Of Fear". TVGuide.com. 
^ Alan Jones. "Floods of Fear". RadioTimes.