Killer Instinct Gold is a 1996 fighting video game based on the arcade game Killer Instinct 2 developed by Rare and released by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64. Like the original series entry, players fight on a 2D plane using punch and kick buttons to make successive hits, or combos. Large combo successions lead to stronger attacks and brutal, stylistic finisher moves underscored by an announcer. Players fight as characters including a gargoyle, a ninja, and a femme fatale in settings such as a jungle and a spaceship. Killer Instinct Gold uses many of the characters, combos, and 3D, pre-rendered environments of the arcade version, but adds a training mode, new camera views, and improved audiovisuals.
Rare was a prominent second-party developer for Nintendo, and produced the Killer Instinct series exclusively for the company as their response to Mortal Kombat. Following the success of the 1995 Killer Instinct port for the Super Nintendo home console, Rare began a sequel for the same console. They transitioned development to the Nintendo 64 upon its announcement. Gold was scheduled as a launch title for the new console but was delayed until its North American release in November 1996. It received a wider release in May 1997. Gold was also included in Rare's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation, Rare Replay.
Reviewers preferred the Gold Nintendo 64 port to its arcade version. They particularly appreciated the sound and background upgrades, but noted that the character animations were not as sharp. Reviewers did not like the game's emphasis on amassing combos over more strategic gameplay, and some thought Gold needed more of a graphical upgrade over its arcade version, considering newer releases in the fighting game genre. Critics recommended the game primarily for fans of the series and genre, but IGN reported that even fans were upset by changes in the combo system and the absence of several well-liked characters. Gold ultimately did not replicate the success of the Super Nintendo original, and the series remained dormant through its 2002 acquisition by Microsoft until its 2013 reboot.


== Gameplay ==

Killer Instinct Gold is a port of the arcade fighting video game Killer Instinct 2. Like other entries in the Killer Instinct series, two characters controlled by humans or artificial intelligence fight in one-on-one matches to deplete their opponent's health meter. While the characters move and attack on a 2D plane, the background is depicted in pre-rendered 3D (as opposed to the arcade's pre-rendered full-motion video backgrounds) and gives the appearance of depth. Players fight with a six-button setup—three punch buttons and three kick buttons, similar to the controls in Street Fighter II. Players chain together a series of hits into "combos" for increased damage. Some combos consist of a specific, memorized series of button presses. Multiple hit combos lead to stronger attacks and brutal, stylistic finisher moves, or "fatalities". Players on the receiving end of a combo can interrupt the other player's sequence with a "combo breaker". An announcer narrates major game moments with phrases like, "Awesome combo!" Players can also interact with the backgrounds, which include a spaceship, jungle, and castle. Players can unlock new character appearances and gameplay difficulty levels, and fight either against the computer (in arcade or tournament modes) or against a human in two-player mode.
The game uses all of the characters, combos, and environments available in the arcade Killer Instinct 2. There are a total of ten characters: seven from the original Killer Instinct (although the game's renditions of Fulgore and Glacius are said to be different individuals) plus the sequel's three newcomers, Maya, Tusk and Kim Wu, in addition to the new final boss, Gargos. Chief Thunder, Riptor and Cinder did not return from the original game. Gold adds a new "practice mode" lets players follow tutorials and rehearse their skills, and team and tournament modes let players face-off against each other. In the new knockout tournament mode, players cycle through a preselected team of characters when their current character is eliminated. Gold also features a new camera with automatically zoom functions to better frame the fight, 3D backgrounds enhancements, and an upgraded soundtrack. Some voiceovers are missing from the Nintendo 64 release. The game plays in 60 frames per second.


== Development ==

Killer Instinct Gold was developed by Rare. The British company was becoming a prominent second-party developer and ally for Nintendo. Their Killer Instinct series was their version of Mortal Kombat for Nintendo. A departure from fighting games such as Street Fighter, Killer Instinct and Mortal Kombat both had a faster, more aggressive pace and placed less emphasis on patience and mastery. The Killer Instinct series began as an arcade game (1994) and was ported to Nintendo's Super Nintendo (1995) and Game Boy. The games industry expected a sequel after the Super Nintendo release saw wide success, with over three million copies sold. Following market demand, Rare began development on a sequel for the arcade. They had a Super Nintendo version in development, but transitioned to Nintendo's new Nintendo 64 after the console's announcement. The Killer Instinct team split itself between the arcade version and the Nintendo 64 release that would become Killer Instinct Gold. The latter began work as soon as Rare received its Nintendo 64 development kit.
The seven-person team began development on the sequel with the ideas that did not fit into the original. They also incorporated feedback from Killer Instinct players. Killer Instinct 2‍‍ '​‍s art, design, and programming changed continuously throughout development up until its release. Kevin Bayliss designed the characters and Chris Tilston developed the engine with feedback from Nintendo's Ken Lobb. Rare used compression technology to fit the arcade version onto the smaller Nintendo 64 cartridge.
The game was originally scheduled to be among the first two launch titles for the Nintendo 64, but missed the release window. It was published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 and was released in North America on November 25, 1996, and in other countries the following year, on May 9, 1997. Its soundtrack was released on compact disc, which was rare for 90s video games. Rare, under contract, ultimately finished its Super Nintendo Killer Instinct 2 port, but Nintendo chose not to release it.


== Reception ==
In 1996, reviewers compared Gold favorably to Killer Instinct 2. Doug Perry (IGN) thought Gold‍‍ '​‍s music was crisper, though he and Ed Lomas (CVG) found that the game noticeably lost animation frames in comparison. But while GameSpot wrote that Gold was decent, the best entry in the series thus far, and "a good offering" in the first set of Nintendo 64 games (better than the other option, Mortal Kombat Trilogy), other reviewers only recommended Gold for fans of the series, fans of fighting games, and those most desperate for a Nintendo 64 fighting game. AllGame said that Killer Instinct Gold was best for players who want "Mortal Kombat on speed" with a "hyperactive Barry White" announcer. GamePro readers voted the game the second best of 1996 after Tekken 2. Next Generation and N64 Magazine agreed that Tekken 2 and Virtua Fighter 2 had outclassed Killer Instinct Gold. N64 also noted how the game had waned from a celebrated announcement to a quiet European release.
Reviewers highly praised the game's sound and environment backdrops, and noted that the character animations were not as sharp in comparison. (CVG said it was due to the "fuzzy anti-aliasing" when the camera zoomed in.) Perry (IGN) additionally appreciated the stereo sound, special effects, and camera work. GamePro liked the sound but felt the explosions and "death screeches" needed work. Unlike IGN and CVG, GamePro praised the "lively" character animations over the "flawed" backgrounds. GameSpot considered the graphics "near perfect" apart from the character animations. Game Informer was similarly impressed by the graphics, but one reviewer commented that Gold had few other positive features.
GamePro gave the game perfect scores in controls and fun, but Next Generation reported the opposite: that the controls were as awkward as they were on the Super Nintendo and ultimately "it's just not much fun". Many other reviewers criticized how Gold diminished the importance of skill with its combo-based gameplay. Daily Radar and Lomas (CVG) praised the training mode, which he also liked in its SNES predecessor, but ultimately thought the game had little "flow"—every match was focused on huge combos rather than small, strategic moves. Thus, players were forced to train before they could effectively combo long enough to win matches. Perry (IGN) also complained about the game's shallow emphasis on "archaic" combo sequence memorization rather than creative extempore. He also thought there were too few characters and that the game's closeness to its arcade version made it appear dated, with a "cheesy 80s feel". Perry rated Gold as "okay" overall. Multiple reviewers agreed that the game needed more of a graphical upgrade from its arcade setup. N64 Magazine concluded that even in the Nintendo 64's then-meager catalog of titles, Killer Instinct Gold did not distinguish itself. They said the game had a lifespan of "weeks rather than months".


== Legacy ==
After the 1996 Killer Instinct Gold did not sell as well as the Super Nintendo original, the series went dormant. IGN reported in 2010 that Killer Instinct Gold had upset series fans by changing the combo move sets and omitting "fan favorite" characters from the original. The website added that Rare knew that fans wanted a new Killer Instinct entry more than any other Rare franchise. Microsoft purchased Rare in 2002, ending the acquisition's prominent alliance with Nintendo. Microsoft and Rare revived the series for the Xbox One in 2013. In 2014, GamesRadar ranked Gold the 35th best game on the Nintendo 64 console.
Killer Instinct Gold was later emulated in the August 2015 Xbox One compilation of 30 Rare titles, Rare Replay. Nintendo Life wrote that Gold‍‍ '​‍s graphics had not aged well. The New York Daily News reported that Killer Instinct Gold, while "underrated" in its time, had withered into an outdated frustration as the anthology's biggest letdown. Destructoid singled out Gold as the collection's worst title, namely because it was a "barebones" Killer Instinct 2.


== References ==