The following is a list and timeline of innovations as well as inventions and discoveries that involved British people or the United Kingdom including predecessor states in the history of the formation of the United Kingdom. This list covers innovation and invention in the mechanical, electronic, and industrial fields, as well as medicine, military devices and theory, artistic and scientific discovery and innovation, and ideas in religion and ethics.
The scientific revolution in 17th century Europe stimulated innovation and discovery in Britain. Experimentation was considered central to innovation by groups such as the Royal Society. The English patent system evolved from its medieval origins into a system that recognised intellectual property; this encouraged invention and spurred on the Industrial Revolution from the late 18th century. During the 19th century, innovation in Britain led to revolutionary changes in manufacturing, the development of factory systems, and growth of transportation by railway and steam ship that spread around the world. In the 20th century, Britain's rate of innovation, measured by patents registered, slowed in comparison to other leading economies, although science and technology continued to develop rapidly in absolute terms.


== 17th century ==
1605
Bacon's cipher, a method of steganography (hiding a secret message), is devised by Sir Francis Bacon.
1620
The first navigable submarine is designed by William Bourne and built by Dutchman Cornelius Drebbel.
1625
Early experiments in water desalination are conducted by Sir Francis Bacon.
1657
Anchor escapement for clock making is invented by Robert Hooke.
1667
A tin can telephone is devised by Robert Hooke.
1698
The first commercial steam-powered device, a water pump, is developed by Thomas Savery.


== 18th century ==
1701
An improved seed drill is designed by Jethro Tull.
1712
The first practical steam engine is designed by Thomas Newcomen.
1730
The Rotherham plough, the first plough to be widely built in factories and commercially successful, is patented by Joseph Foljambe.
1740
The first electrostatic motors are developed by Andrew Gordon in the 1740s.
1753
Invention of hollow-pipe drainage is credited to Sir Hugh Dalrymple who died in 1753.
1765
James Small advances the design of the plough using mathematical methods to improve on the Scotch plough of James Anderson of Hermiston.
1767
Adam Ferguson (1767), often known as ‘The Father of Modern Sociology’, publishes his work An Essay on the History of Civil Society.
1776
Scottish economist Adam Smith, often known as 'The father of modern economics', publishes his seminal text The Wealth of Nations.
The Watt steam engine, conceived in 1765, goes into production. It is the first type of steam engine to make use of steam at a pressure just above atmospheric.
1781
The Iron Bridge, the first metal bridge of any kind, is built by Abraham Darby III.
1783
A pioneer of selective breeding and artificial selection, Robert Bakewell, forms the Dishley Society to promote and advance the interests of livestock breeders.
1786
The threshing machine is invented by Andrew Meikle.
1798
Edward Jenner invents the first vaccine.


== 19th century ==
1802
Sir Humphry Davy creates the first incandescent light by passing a current from a battery, at the time the world's most powerful, through a thin strip of platinum.
1804
The world's first locomotive-hauled railway journey is made by Richard Trevithick's steam locomotive.
1807
Alexander John Forsyth invents percussion ignition, the foundation of modern firearms.
1822
Charles Babbage proposes the idea for a Difference engine, an automatic mechanical calculator designed to tabulate polynomial functions, in a paper to the Royal Astronomical Society entitled "Note on the application of machinery to the computation of astronomical and mathematical tables".
1823
An improved system of soil drainage is developed by James Smith.
1825
William Sturgeon invents the electromagnet.
1828
A mechanical reaping machine is invented by Patrick Bell.
1831
Electromagnetic induction, the operating principle of transformers and nearly all modern electric generators, is discovered by Michael Faraday.
1835
Scotsman James Bowman Lindsay invents the incandescent light bulb.
1836
The Marsh test for detecting arsenic poisoning is developed by James Marsh.
1837
Charles Babbage describes an Analytical Engine, a mechanical general-purpose computer.
The Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph, first commercially successful electric telegraph, is designed by Sir Charles Wheatstone and Sir William Fothergill Cooke.
1839
A pedal bicycle is invented by Kirkpatrick Macmillan.
1842
Superphosphate, the first chemical fertiliser, is patented by John Bennet Lawes.
1843
SS Great Britain, the world's first steam-powered, screw propeller-driven passenger liner with an iron hull is launched. Designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel, it was at the time the largest ship afloat.
1847
Boolean algebra, the basis for digital logic, is introduced by George Boole in his book The Mathematical Analysis of Logic.
1852
A steam-driven ploughing engine is invented by John Fowler.
1853
English physician Alexander Wood develops a medical hypodermic syringe with a needle fine enough to pierce the skin.
1854
The Playfair cipher, the first literal digraph substitution cipher, is invented by Charles Wheatstone and later promoted for use by Lord Playfair.
1868
Mushet steel, the first commercial steel alloy, is invented by Robert Forester Mushet.
Thomas Humber develops a bicycle design with the pedals driving the rear wheel.
1869
A bicycle design is developed by Thomas McCall.
1873
Discovery of the photoconductivity of the element selenium by Willoughby Smith. This led to the invention of photoelectric cells (solar panels), including those used in the earliest television systems.
1876
Scotsman Alexander Graham Bell patents the telephone in the U.S.
The first safety bicycle is designed by the English engineer Harry John Lawson (also called Henry). Unlike the penny-farthing, the rider's feet were within reach of the ground, making it safer to stop.
1878
Demonstration of an incandescent light bulb by Joseph Wilson Swan.
1883
The Fresno scraper, which became a model for modern earth movers, is invented in California by Scottish emigrant James Porteous.
1884
The light switch is invented by John Holmes.
1885
The first commercially successful safety bicycle, called the Rover, is designed by John Kemp Starley. The following year Dan Albone produces a derivative of this called the Ivel Safety cycle.
1892
Sir Francis Galton devises a method for classifying fingerprints that proved useful in forensic science.
1897
The world's first wireless station is established on the Isle of Wight.


== 20th century ==
1902
The first commercially successful light farm tractor is patented by Dan Albone.
1907
Henry Joseph Round discovers electroluminescence, the principle behind LEDs.
1910
The first formal driving school, the British School of Motoring, is founded in London.
1922
In Sorbonne, France, Englishman Edwin Belin demonstrates a mechanical scanning device, an early precursor to modern television.
1926
John Logie Baird makes the first public demonstration of a mechanical television on 26 January (the first successful transmissions were in early 1923 and February 1924). Later, in July 1928, he demonstrated the first colour television.
1930
The jet engine is patented by Sir Frank Whittle.
1932
The Anglepoise lamp is patented by George Carwardine, a design consultant specialising in vehicle suspension systems.
1933
The Cat's eye road marking is invented by Percy Shaw and patented the following year.
1936
English economist John Maynard Keynes publishes his work The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money which challenged the established classical economics and led to the Keynesian Revolution in the way economists thought.
The 405-line television system goes into use, the first fully electronic television system to be used in regular broadcasting.
1939
The initial design of the Bombe, an electromechanical device to assist with the deciphering of messages encrypted by the Enigma machine, is produced by Alan Turing at the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS).
1943
Colossus computer begines working, the world's first electronic digital programmable computer.
1949
The Manchester Mark 1 computer, significant because of its pioneering inclusion of index registers, ran its first programme error free. Its chief designers are Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn.
1951
The concept of microprogramming is developed by Maurice Wilkes from the realisation that the Central Processing Unit (CPU) of a computer could be controlled by a miniature, highly specialised computer program in high-speed ROM.
LEO is the first business application (a payroll system) on an electronic computer.
1952
Autocode, regarded as the first compiled programming language, is developed for the Manchester Mark 1 by Alick Glennie.
1955
The first accurate atomic clock, a caesium standard based on a certain transition of the caesium-133 atom, is built by Louis Essen at the National Physical Laboratory. This clock enabled further development of general relativity, and started a basis for an enhanced SI unit system.
1959
Metrovick 950, the first commercial transistor computer, is built by the Metropolitan-Vickers company.
1963
High strength carbon fiber is invented by engineers at the Royal Aircraft Establishment.
The Lava lamp is invented by British accountant Edward Craven Walker.
1964
The first theory of the Higgs boson is put forward by Peter Higgs, a particle-physics theorist at the University of Edinburgh, and five other physicists. The particle is discovered in 2012 at CERN's Large Hadron Collider and its existence is confirmed in 2013.
1965
A pioneer of the development of dairy farming systems, Rex Paterson, set out his principles for labour management.
1967
The Automated Teller Machine and the Personal Identification Number system are invented by James Goodfellow.
1969
The first carbon fibre fabric in the world is weaved in Stockport, England.
1970
One of the first handheld televisions, the MTV-1, is developed by Sir Clive Sinclair.
1973
Clifford Cocks develops the algorithm for the RSA cipher while working at the Government Communications Headquarters, approximately three years before it was independently developed by Rivest, Shamir and Adleman at MIT. The British government declassified the 1973 invention in 1997.
1979
The tree shelter is invented by Graham Tuley to protect tree seedlings.
One of the first laptop computers, the GRiD Compass, is designed by Bill Moggridge.
1984
DNA profiling is discovered by Sir Alec Jeffreys at the University of Leicester.
One of the world's first computer games to use 3D graphics, Elite, is developed by David Braben and Ian Bell.
1989
Sir Tim Berners-Lee writes a proposal for what will become the World Wide Web. The following year, he specified HTML, the hypertext language, and HTTP, the protocol.
The Touchpad pointing device is first developed for Psion computers.
1991
A patent for an iris recognition algorithm is filed by John Daugman while working at the University of Cambridge which became the basis of all publicly deployed iris recognition systems.
The source code for the world's first web browser, called WorldWideWeb (later renamed Nexus to avoid confusion with the World Wide Web), is released into the public domain by Sir Tim Berners-Lee.
1992
The first SMS message in the world is sent over the UK's GSM network.
1995
The world's first national DNA database is developed.
1997
The ThrustSSC jet-propelled car, designed and built in England, sets the land speed record.


== 21st century ==
2003
Beagle 2, a British landing spacecraft that forms part of the European Space Agency's 2003 Mars Express mission lands on the surface of Mars but fails to communicate. It is located twelve years later in a series of images from NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter that suggest two of Beagle's four solar panels failed to deploy, blocking the spacecraft's communications antenna.
2004
Graphene is isolated from graphite at the University of Manchester by Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov.
2012
Raspberry Pi, a single-board computer, is launched and quickly becomes popular for education in programming and computer science.
2014
The European Space Agency's Philae lander leaves the Rosetta spacecraft and makes the first ever landing on a comet. The Philae lander was built with significant British expertise and technology, alongside that of several other countries.


== Clock making ==
Balance spring - Robert Hooke
Balance wheel - Robert Hooke
Coaxial escapement - George Daniels
Grasshopper escapement, H1, H2, H3 and H4 watches (a watch built to solve the longitude measurement problem) - John Harrison
Gridiron pendulum - John Harrison
Lever escapement The greatest single improvement ever applied to pocket watches - Thomas Mudge
Longcase clock or grandfather clock - William Clement
Marine chronometer - John Harrison


== Clothing manufacturing ==
Derby Rib (stocking manufacture) - Jedediah Strutt
Flying shuttle - John Kay
Mauveine, the first synthetic organic dye - William Henry Perkin
Power loom - Edmund Cartwright
Spinning frame - John Kay
Spinning jenny - James Hargreaves
Spinning mule - Samuel Crompton
Sewing machine - Thomas Saint in 1790
Water frame - Richard Arkwright
Stocking frame - William Lee
Warp-loom and Bobbinet - John Heathcoat


== Communications ==
Uniform Penny Post, and postage stamp  - Sir Rowland Hill
Christmas card  - Sir Henry Cole
Valentines card  - Modern card 18th century England
Pencil - Cumbria, England
Mechanical pencil - Sampson Mordan and John Isaac Hawkins in 1822.
Clockwork radio  - Trevor Baylis
Radio, the first transmission using a Spark Transmitter, achieving a range of approximately 500 metres. - David E. Hughes
Electromagnetic induction & Faraday's law of induction Began as a series of experiments by Faraday that later became some of the first ever experiments in the discovery of radio waves and the development of radio - Michael Faraday 
Pioneer in the development of radio communication - William Eccles
Pioneering work on the development of the long-lasting materials that made today's liquid crystal displays possible - Team headed by Sir Brynmor Jones and Developed by Scotsman George Gray and Englishman Ken Harrison In conjunction with the Royal Radar Establishment and the University of Hull 
Pioneer of stereo - Alan Blumlein 
Shorthand - Timothy Bright (1550/1-1615). Invented first modern shorthand
Pitman Shorthand - Isaac Pitman
Proposed the existence of the Kennelly–Heaviside layer, a layer of ionised gas that reflects radio waves around the Earth's curvature - Oliver Heaviside
Typewriter - First patent for a device similar to a typewriter granted to Henry Mill in 1714.
the world's first automatic totalisator - George Julius
pioneer in the use of fiber optics in telecommunications - Charles K. Kao and George Hockham
The originator of the concept of geostationary satellites for the use of telecommunications relays - Arthur C Clarke
Teletext Information Service - The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
Print stereotyping - William Ged (1690–1749) 
Roller printing - Thomas Bell (patented 1783) 
The adhesive postage stamp and the postmark - James Chalmers (1782–1853) 
Universal Standard Time: Sir Sandford Fleming (1827–1915) 
Light signalling between ships: Admiral Philip H. Colomb (1831–1899) 
The teleprinter - Frederick G. Creed (1871–1957) 
Radar - Robert Watson-Watt (1892–1973)
The underlying principles of Radio - James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) 


== Computing ==
ACE and Pilot ACE  - Alan Turing
ARM architecture The ARM CPU design is the microprocessor architecture of 98% of mobile phones and every smartphone.
First programmer - Ada Lovelace
First Programming Language Analytical Engine ordercode - Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace
Argo system the world's first electrically powered mechanical analogue computer (also called at the Argo Clock) - Arthur Pollen
Sumlock ANITA calculator the world's first all-electronic desktop calculator - Bell Punch Co
The world's first 'slimline' pocket calculator, the Sinclair Executive amongst other electrical/electronic innovations - Sir Clive Sinclair
Osborne 1 The first commercially successful portable computer, the precursor to the Laptop computer - Adam Osborne
Heavily involved in the development of the Linux kernel - Andrew Morton & Alan Cox
Flip-flop circuit, which became the basis of electronic memory (Random-access memory) in computers - William Eccles and F. W. Jordan
Universal Turing machine - The UTM model is considered to be the origin of the "stored program computer" used by John von Neumann in 1946 for his "Electronic Computing Instrument" that now bears von Neumann's name: the von Neumann architecture, also UTM is considered the first operating system - Alan Turing
The development of packet switching co-invented by British engineer Donald Davies and American Paul Baran - National Physical Laboratory, London England
The first person to conceptualise the Integrated Circuit - Geoffrey W.A. Dummer
The first modern computer Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine - (SSEM), nicknamed Baby. Was the world's first stored-program computer. Developed by Frederic Calland Williams & Tom Kilburn
Williams tube - a cathode ray tube used to electronically store binary data (Can store roughly 500 to 1,000 bits of data) - Freddie Williams & Tom Kilburn
Ferranti Mark 1 - Also known as the Manchester Electronic Computer was the first computer to use the principles of early CPU design (Central processing unit) - Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn - Also the world's first successful commercially available general-purpose electronic computer.
The oldest known recordings of computer generated music were played by the Ferranti Mark 1 computer - Christopher Strachey
EDSAC was the first complete, fully functional computer to use the von Neumann architecture, the basis of every modern computer - Maurice Wilkes
EDSAC 2 the successor to the Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator or EDSAC. It was the first computer to have a microprogrammed (Microcode)control unit and a bit slice hardware architecture - Team headed by Maurice Wilkes
The first graphical computer game OXO on the EDSAC at Cambridge University - A.S. Douglas
Atlas Computer, it was arguably the world's first supercomputer and was the fastest computer in the world until the release of the American CDC 6600 Also This machine introduced many modern architectural concepts: spooling, interrupts, pipelining, interleaved memory, virtual memory and paging - Team headed by Tom Kilburn
Digital audio player (MP3 Player) - Kane Kramer
Co-Inventor of the world's first trackball device - developed by Tom Cranston, Fred Longstaff and Kenyon Taylor
The world's first handheld computer (Psion Organiser) - Psion PLC
The first rugged computer - Husky (computer)
First PC-compatible palmtop computer (Atari Portfolio) - Ian Cullimore
Denotational semantics - Christopher Strachey pioneer in programming language design
Wolfram's 2-state 3-symbol Turing machine - Stephen Wolfram


== Engineering ==
Adjustable spanner - Edwin Beard Budding
Backhoe loader - Joseph Cyril Bamford
Cavity magnetron - John Randall and Harry Boot critical component for Microwave generation in Microwave ovens and high powered Radios (Radar)
Carey Foster bridge - Carey Foster
Electric transformer - Michael Faraday
First coke-consuming blast furnace - Abraham Darby I
First working universal joint - Robert Hooke
Crookes tube the first cathode ray tubes - William Crookes
First compression ignition engine aka the Diesel Engine - Herbert Akroyd Stuart
Hydrogen Fuel Cell - William Robert Grove
Modified version of the Newcomen steam engine (Pickard engine) - James Pickard
Steam turbine - Charles Algernon Parsons
Francis turbine - James B. Francis
Gas turbine - John Barber (engineer)
Microturbines - Chris and Paul Bladon of Bladon Jets
The world's first oil refinery and a process of extracting paraffin from coal laying the foundations for the modern oil industry - James Young (1811–1883)
Pendulum governor - Frederick Lanchester
Contributed to the development of Radar - Scotsman Robert Watson-Watt and Englishman Arnold Frederic Wilkins
Internal combustion engine - Samuel Brown
Fourdrinier machine - Henry Fourdrinier
Microchip - Geoffrey W.A. Dummer
light-emitting diode (did not invent the first visible light, only theorised)- H. J. Round
Two-stroke engine - Joseph Day
Pioneer of radio guidance systems - Archibald Low
Screw-cutting lathe - Henry Hindley
The first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe - Henry Maudslay

The first electrical measuring instrument, the electroscope - William Gilbert
Rectilinear Slide rule - William Oughtred
Devised a standard for screw threads leading to its widespread acceptance - Joseph Whitworth
The Wimshurst machine is an Electrostatic generator for producing high voltages - James Wimshurst
Hot bulb engine or heavy oil engine - Herbert Akroyd Stuart
Hydraulic crane - William George Armstrong
Vacuum diode also known as a vacuum tube - John Ambrose Fleming
Linear motor is a multi-phase alternating current (AC) electric motor - Charles Wheatstone then improved by Eric Laithwaite
Lynch Motor - Cedric Lynch
Designed water and sewerage systems for over 30 cities across Europe - William Lindley
Concrete Canvas - Will Crawford and Peter Brewin
The world's first house powered with hydroelectricity - Cragside, Northumberland
Wind tunnel - Francis Herbert Wenham


== Household appliances ==
Perambulator - William Kent designed a baby carriage in 1733
Collapsible baby buggy - Owen Maclaren
Domestic dishwasher - key modifications by William Howard Livens 
"Bagless" vacuum cleaner - James Dyson
"Puffing Billy" - First powered vacuum cleaner - Hubert Cecil Booth
Fire extinguisher - George William Manby
Folding carton - Charles Henry Foyle
Lawn mower - Edwin Beard Budding
Rubber band - Stephen Perry
Daniell cell - John Frederic Daniell
Tin can - Peter Durand
Corkscrew - Reverend Samuell Henshall
Mouse trap - James Henry Atkinson
Modern flushing toilet - John Harington
The pay toilet - John Nevil Maskelyne, Maskelyne invented a lock for London toilets, which required a penny to operate, hence the euphemism "spend a penny".
Electric toaster - Rookes Evelyn Bell Crompton
Teasmade - Albert E. Richardson
Magnifying glass - Roger Bacon
Thermosiphon, which forms the basis of most modern central heating systems - Thomas Fowler
Automatic electric kettle - Russell Hobbs
Thermos Flask - James Dewar 
Toothbrush - William Edward Addis
Sunglasses - James Ayscough
The Refrigerator - William Cullen (1748) 
The Flush toilet: Alexander Cummings (1775) 
The first distiller to triple distill Irish whiskey:John Jameson (Whisky distiller)
The first automated can-filing machine John West (1809–1888) 
The waterproof Mackintosh - Charles Macintosh (1766–1843) 
The kaleidoscope: Sir David Brewster (1781–1868) 
Keiller's marmalade Janet Keiller (1797) - The first recipe of rind suspended marmalade or Dundee marmalade produced in Dundee.
The modern lawnmower - Edwin Beard Budding (1830) 
The Lucifer friction match: Sir Isaac Holden (1807–1897) 
The self filling pen - Robert Thomson (1822–1873) 
Cotton-reel thread - J & J Clark of Paisley 
Lime Cordial - Peter Burnett in 1867 
Bovril beef extract - John Lawson Johnston in 1874 
Electric clock - Alexander Bain (1840) 
Chemical Telegraph (Automatic Telegraphy) Alexander Bain (1846) In England Bain's telegraph was used on the wires of the Electric Telegraph Company to a limited extent, and in 1850 it was used in America.
Wellington Boots


== Ideas, Religion and Ethics ==
Malthusianism and the groundwork for the study of population dynamics - Thomas Robert Malthus with his work An Essay on the Principle of Population.
Classical Liberalism - John Locke known as the "Father of Classical Liberalism".
Utilitarianism by Jeremy Bentham
Anglicanism by Henry VIII of England
Methodism by John Wesley and Charles Wesley
Quakers by George Fox
Agnosticism by Thomas Henry Huxley


== Industrial processes ==
English crucible steel - Benjamin Huntsman
Steel production Bessemer process - Henry Bessemer
Hydraulic press - Joseph Bramah
Parkesine, the first man-made plastic - Alexander Parkes
Portland cement - Joseph Aspdin
Sheffield plate - Thomas Boulsover
Water frame - Richard Arkwright
Stainless steel - Harry Brearley
Rubber Masticator - Thomas Hancock
Power Loom - Edmund Cartwright
Parkes process - Alexander Parkes
Lead chamber process - John Roebuck
Development of the world's first commercially successful manufacture of high quality flat glass using the float glass process - Alastair Pilkington
The first commercial electroplating process - George Elkington
The Wilson Yarn Clearer - Peter Wilson
Float Glass - Alastair Pilkington - Modern Glass manufacturing process


== Medicine ==
First correct description of circulation of the blood - William Harvey
Smallpox vaccine - Edward Jenner with his discovery is said to have "saved more lives (...) than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the beginning of recorded history."
Surgical forceps - Stephen Hales
Antisepsis in surgery - Joseph Lister
Artificial intraocular lens transplant surgery for cataract patients - Harold Ridley
Clinical thermometer - Thomas Clifford Allbutt.
isolation of fibrinogen ("coagulable lymph"), investigation of the structure of the lymphatic system and description of red blood cells by the surgeon William Hewson (surgeon)
Credited with discovering how to culture embryonic stem cells in 1981 - Martin Evans
First blood pressure measurement and first cardiac catheterisation-Stephen Hales
Pioneer of anaesthesia and father of epidemiology for locating the source of cholera - John Snow (physician)
pioneered the use of sodium cromoglycate as a remedy for asthma - Roger Altounyan
The first scientist to demonstrate that a cancer may be caused by an environmental carcinogen and one of the founders of orthopedy - Percivall Pott
Performed the first successful blood transfusion - James Blundell
Discovered the active ingredient of Aspirin - Edward Stone
Discovery of Protein crystallography - Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin
The world’s first successful stem cell transplant - John Raymond Hobbs
First typhoid vaccine - Almroth Wright
Pioneer of the treatment of epilepsy - Edward Henry Sieveking
discovery of Nitrous oxide (entonox/"laughing gas") and its anaesthetic properties - Humphry Davy
Computed Tomography (CT scanner) - Godfrey Newbold Hounsfield
Gray's Anatomy widely regarded as the first complete human anatomy textbook - Henry Gray
Discovered Parkinson's disease - James Parkinson
General anaesthetic - Pioneered by Scotsman James Young Simpson and Englishman John Snow
Contributed to the development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) - Sir Peter Mansfield
Statistical parametric mapping - Karl J. Friston
The development of in vitro fertilization - Patrick Christopher Steptoe and Robert Geoffrey Edwards
First baby genetically selected to be free of a breast cancer - University College London
Viagra - Peter Dunn, Albert Wood, Dr Nicholas Terrett
Acetylcholine - Henry Hallett Dale
EKG (underlying principles) - various
Vitamins and Tryptophan - Frederick Gowland Hopkins
Earliest pharmacopoeia in English
The hip replacement operation, in which a stainless steel stem and 22mm head fit into a polymer socket and both parts are fixed into position by PMMA cement - pioneered by John Charnley
In vitro fertilisation - Developed by Sir Robert Geoffrey Edwards with a first successful birth in 1978 as a result of natural cycle IVF where no stimulation was made.
Description of Hay fever - John Bostock (physician) in 1819
Pioneering the use of surgical anaesthesia with Chloroform: Sir James Young Simpson (1811–1870) 
Discovery of hypnotism (November 1841) - James Braid (1795–1860) 
Identifying the mosquito as the carrier of malaria: Sir Ronald Ross (1857–1932) 
Identifying the cause of brucellosis: Sir David Bruce (1855–1931) 
Discovering the vaccine for typhoid fever: Sir William B. Leishman (1865–1926) 
Discovering insulin - John J R Macleod (1876–1935) with others 
Ambulight PDT: light-emitting sticking plaster used in photodynamic therapy (PDT) for treating non-melanoma skin cancer. Developed by Ambicare Dundee's Ninewells Hospital and St Andrews University. (2010)
Primary creator of the artificial kidney (Professor Kenneth Lowe - Later Queen's physician in Scotland) 
Developing the first beta-blocker drugs: Sir James W. Black in 1964 
Glasgow Coma Scale: Graham Teasdale and Bryan J. Jennett (1974) 
EKG [Electrocardiography]: Alexander Muirhead (1911) 
Pioneering the use of surgical anaesthesia with Chloroform: Sir James Young Simpson (1811–1870) 
Discovery of hypnotism (November 1841) - James Braid (1795–1860) 
Identifying the mosquito as the carrier of malaria: Sir Ronald Ross (1857–1932) 
Identifying the cause of brucellosis: Sir David Bruce (1855–1931) 
Discovering the vaccine for typhoid fever: Sir William B. Leishman (1865–1926) 
Discovering insulin - John J R Macleod (1876–1935) with others 
Penicillin: Sir Alexander Fleming (1881–1955) 
Discovering an effective tuberculosis treatment: Sir John Crofton in the 1950s 
Primary creator of the artificial kidney (Professor Kenneth Lowe - Later Queen's physician in Scotland) 
Developing the first beta-blocker drugs: Sir James W. Black in 1964 
EKG [Electrocardiography]: Alexander Muirhead (1911) 


== Military ==
Battle Tank/The tank - Developed and first used in combat by the British during World War I as a means to break the deadlock of trench warfare. Attributed to Ernest Dunlop Swinton
Fighter aircraft - The Vickers F.B.5 Gunbus of 1914 was the first of its kind.
Congreve rocket - William Congreve
Harrier Jump Jet - VTOL (Vertical Take Off and Landing aircraft)
Aircraft Carrier - HMS Argus (I49)
Dreadnought Battleship - HMS Dreadnought (1906)
Bailey Bridge - Donald Bailey
Chobham armour
Livens Projector - William Howard Livens
H2S radar (airborne radar to aid the bomb targeting) - Alan Blumlein
Bouncing bomb - Barnes Wallis
Safety fuse - William Bickford
Fairbairn-Sykes Fighting Knife - William Ewart Fairbairn and Eric A. Sykes
Armstrong Gun - Sir William Armstrong
High explosive squash head - Sir Charles Dennistoun Burney
Shrapnel shell - Henry Shrapnel
Bullpup firearm configuration - Thorneycroft carbine
Puckle Gun - James Puckle
The side by side Boxlock action, AKA The double barreled shotgun - Anson and Deeley
Stun grenades - Invented by the SAS in the 1960s.
Smokeless propellant to replace gunpowder with the use of Cordite - Frederick Abel
Rubber bullet and Plastic bullet - Developed by the Ministry of Defence during The Troubles in Northern Ireland.
Depth charge
Torpedo - Robert Whitehead
The Whitworth rifle, considered the first sniper rifle. During the American Civil War the Whitworth rifle had been known to kill at ranges of about 800 yards - Sir Joseph Whitworth
The world's first practical underwater active sound detection apparatus, the ASDIC Active Sonar - Developed by Canadian physicist Robert William Boyle and English physicist Albert Beaumont Wood
The first self-powered machine gun Maxim gun - Sir Hiram Maxim, Although the Inventor is American, the Maxim gun was financed by Albert Vickers of Vickers Limited company and produced in Hatton Garden London
Steam catapult-Commander Colin C. Mitchell RNVR
Special forces - SAS Founded by Sir David Stirling.


== Mining ==
Tunnel boring machine - James Henry Greathead and Isambard Kingdom Brunel
Davy lamp - Humphry Davy
Geordie lamp - George Stephenson
Beam engine - Used for pumping water from mines


== Musical instruments ==
Concertina - Charles Wheatstone
Theatre organ - Robert Hope-Jones
English horn - A version of the Oboe
Logical bassoon, an electronically controlled version of the bassoon - Giles Brindley
Northumbrian smallpipes
Tuning fork - John Shore
The piano footpedal - John Broadwood (1732–1812) 


== Photography ==
Ambrotype - Frederick Scott Archer
Calotype - William Fox Talbot
Collodion process - Frederick Scott Archer
Collodion-albumen process - Joseph Sidebotham in 1861
Stereoscope - Charles Wheatstone
Thomas Wedgwood - pioneer of photography, devised the method to copy visible images chemically to permanent media.
Dry plate process also known as gelatine process, is the first economically successful durable photographic medium - Richard Leach Maddox
Kinemacolor was the first successful colour motion picture process, used commercially from 1908 to 1914 - George Albert Smith
Cinematography - William Friese-Greene
Motion picture camera, the Kinetoscope - William Kennedy Laurie Dickson
The first movie projector, the Zoopraxiscope - Eadweard Muybridge
The first experimental film called "The Horse in Motion" in 1872 - Eadweard Muybridge


== Publishing firsts ==
Oldest publisher and printer in the world (having been operating continuously since 1584): Cambridge University Press
first book printed in English: "The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye" by Englishman William Caxton in 1475
The first edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica (1768–81) 
The first English textbook on surgery(1597) 
The first modern pharmacopaedia, William Cullen (1776) The book became 'Europe’s principal text on the classification and treatment of disease' 
The first postcards and picture postcards in the UK 


== Science ==
Modern atomic theory - Considered the father of modern chemistry, John Dalton's experiments with gases led to the development of what is called the modern atomic theory.
Equals sign Robert Recorde, Welshman
Cell biology - Credit for the discovery of the first cells is given to Robert Hooke who described the microscopic compartments of cork cells in 1665
Compound microscope with 30x magnification - Robert Hooke
Universal joint - Robert Hooke
Coggeshall slide rule - Henry Coggeshall
The Iris diaphragm - Robert Hooke
Correct theory of combustion - Robert Hooke
Partition chromatography - Richard Laurence Millington Synge and Archer J.P. Martin
Arnold Frederic Wilkins - pioneer in the development of Radar
Atwood machine used for illustrating the law of uniformly accelerated motion - George Atwood
Marine Barometer - Robert Hooke
Hooke's Law (equation describing elasticity) - Robert Hooke
Electrical generator (dynamo) - Michael Faraday
Faraday cage - Michael Faraday
Magneto-optical effect - Michael Faraday
Calculus - Sir Isaac Newton
Infrared radiation - discovery commonly attributed to William Herschel.
Holography - First developed by Dennis Gabor in Rugby, England. Improved by Nicholas J. Phillips who made it possible to record multi-colour reflection holograms
Discovery of the pion (pi-meson) - Cecil Frank Powell
Wheatstone bridge - Samuel Hunter Christie
Triple achromatic lens - Peter Dollond
Newtonian telescope - Sir Isaac Newton
Hawking radiation - Stephen Hawking
Demonstrated that electric circuits obey the law of the conservation of energy and that electricity is a form of energy First Law of Thermodynamics. Also the unit of energy, the Joule is named after him - James Prescott Joule
Micrometer - William Gascoigne
the first bench micrometer that was capable of measuring to one ten thousandth of an inch - Henry Maudslay

Sinclair Executive, the world's first small electronic pocket calculator - Sir Clive Sinclair
Discovered the element argon - John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh with Scotsman William Ramsay
Standard deviation - Francis Galton
Slide rule - William Oughtred 
Synthesis of coumarin, one of the first synthetic perfumes, and cinnamic acid via the Perkin reaction- William Henry Perkin
The Law of Gravity - Sir Isaac Newton
Newton's laws of motion - Sir Isaac Newton
Pre-empting elements of General Relativity theory - William Kingdon Clifford
Geological Timescale - Arthur Holmes
Electromagnet - William Sturgeon in 1823.
Helium - Norman Lockyer
Weather map  - Sir Francis Galton
Introduced the symbol for "is less than" and "is greater than" - Thomas Harriot 1630
Introduced the "×" symbol for multiplication as well as the abbreviations "sin" and "cos" for the sine and cosine functions - William Oughtred
Dew Point Hygrometer - John Frederic Daniell
Periodic Table - John Alexander Reina Newlands
Splitting the atom - John Cockcroft and Irish physicist Ernest Walton
First full-scale commercial Nuclear Reactor at Calder Hall, opened in 1956.
Seismograph - John Milne
Discovery of oxygen gas (O2) - Joseph Priestley
Discovery of the Atom(nuclear model of) - Ernest Rutherford
Discovery of the Proton - Ernest Rutherford
Discovery of the Electron, isotopes and the inventor of the Mass spectrometer - J. J. Thomson
Discovery of the Neutron - James Chadwick
Nuclear transfer - Is a form of cloning first put into practice by Ian Wilmut and Keith Campbell to clone Dolly the Sheep
Theory of Evolution - Charles Darwin


=== Astronomy ===
Discovery of the "White Spot" on Saturn - Will Hay
Discovery of Proxima Centauri, the closest known star to the Sun, by Robert Innes (1861–1933) 
Discovery of the planet Uranus and the moons Titania, Oberon, Enceladus, Mimas  by Sir William Herschel (German born astronom, later in life British)
Discovery of Triton and the moons Hyperion, Ariel and Umbriel - William Lassell
Planetarium - John Theophilus Desaguliers
Predicts the existence and location of Neptune from irregularities in the orbit of Uranus - John Couch Adams 
Important contributions to the development of radio astronomy - Bernard Lovell 
Newtonian telescope - Sir Isaac Newton 
Achromatic doublet lens - John Dollond 
Coining the phrase 'Big Bang' - Fred Hoyle 
First theorised existence of black holes, binary stars; invented torsion balance - John Michell
Stephen Hawking - World-renowned theoretical physicist made many important contributions to the fields of cosmology and quantum gravity, especially in the context of black holes
Spiral galaxies - William Parsons, 3rd Earl of Rosse 
Discovery of Halley's Comet - Edmond Halley 
Discovery of pulsars - Antony Hewish 
Discovery of Sunspots and was the first person to make a drawing of the Moon through a telescope - Thomas Harriot 
The Eddington limit, the natural limit to the luminosity of stars, or the radiation generated by accretion onto a compact object - Arthur Stanley Eddington 
Aperture synthesis, used for accurate location and imaging of weak radio sources in the field of Radio astronomy - Martin Ryle and Antony Hewish 


=== Chemistry ===
Dalton's law and Law of multiple proportions - John Dalton 
The structure of DNA and pioneering the field of molecular biology - co-developed by Francis Crick  and the American James Watson
DNA sequencing by chain termination - Frederick Sanger 
Discovery of introns in eukaryotic DNA and the mechanism of gene-splicing - Richard J. Roberts 
Discovey of Buckminsterfullerene - Sir Harry Kroto 
Discovery of thallium - William Crookes
Discovered the structure of ferrocene - Geoffrey Wilkinson & others 
Discovers hydrogen as a colorless, odourless gas that burns and can form an explosive mixture with air - Henry Cavendish 
Proposes the law of octaves, a precursor to the Periodic Law - John Newlands 
Bragg's law and establish the field of X-ray crystallography, an important tool for elucidating the crystal structure of substances - William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg 
Introduces concept of atomic number to fix inadequacies of Mendeleev's periodic table, which had been based on atomic weight - Henry Moseley 
First isolation of sodium - Humphry Davy 
First isolation of potassium - Humphry Davy
First isolation of boron - Humphry Davy
First isolation of benzene, the first known aromatic hydrocarbon - Michael Faraday
Publishes Opus Maius, which among other things, proposes an early form of the scientific method, and contains results of his experiments with gunpowder - Roger Bacon 
Publishes several Aristotelian commentaries, an early framework for the scientific method - Robert Grosseteste 
Baconian method, an early forerunner of the scientific method - Sir Francis Bacon
The first discovery of aluminium - Sir Humphry Davy
Pioneer in early Solar Power - Weston cell - Edward Weston (chemist)
Proposes the concept of isotopes, elements with the same chemical properties may have differing atomic weights - Frederick Soddy
The synthesising of xenon hexafluoroplatinate the first time to show that noble gases can form chemical compounds - Neil Bartlett
Callendar effect the theory that linked rising carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere to global temperature (Global warming) - Guy Stewart Callendar
Pioneer of the fuel cell - Francis Thomas Bacon
Pioneer of meteorology by developing a nomenclature system for clouds in 1802 - Luke Howard
Rayleigh scattering explains why the sky is blue, and predicted the existence of the surface waves - John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh


== Sport ==
Football - The rules as we know them today were established in 1848 at Cambridge University, Sheffield F.C. is acknowledged by The Football Association and FIFA as the world's first and oldest football club.
Rugby - William Webb Ellis
Cricket - the world's second-most popular sport can be traced back to the 13th century
Tennis - widely known to have originated in England.
Boxing - England played a key role in the evolution of modern boxing. Boxing was first accepted as an Olympic sport in Ancient Greece in 688 BC
Golf - Modern game invented in Scotland
Billiards
Badminton
Darts - a traditional pub game, the numbering layout was devised by Brian Gamlin
Table-Tennis - was invented on the dinner tables of Britain as an indoor version of tennis
Snooker - Invented by the British Army in India
Ping pong - The game has its origins in England, in the 1880s
Bowls - has been traced to 13th century England
Field hockey - the modern game grew from English public schools in the early 19th century
Netball - the sport emerged from early versions of women's basketball, at Madame Österberg's College in England during the late 1890s.
Rounders - the game originates in England most likely from an older game known as stool ball
The Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race, the first race was in 1829 on the River Thames in London 
Thoroughbred Horseracing - Was first developed in 17th and 18th century England
Polo - its roots began in Persia as a training game for cavalry units, the formal codification of the rules of modern Polo as a sport were established in 19th century England
The format of Modern Olympics - William Penny Brookes
The first Paralympic games competition were held in England in 1948 - Ludwig Guttmann
oldest sporting competition in the world: The Antient Silver Arrow Archery competition known as the Scorton Arrow as it was originally held in Scorton, Yorkshire. It was first shot for in 1673.
oldest cricket festival in the world - Canterbury Cricket Week founded in 1842 
Hawk-Eye ball tracking system.


== Transport ==


=== Aviation ===
Aeronautics and flight. As a pioneer of glider development & first well-documented human flight he discovered and identified the four aerodynamic forces of flight - weight, lift, drag, and thrust. Modern airplane design is based on those discoveries including cambered wings. He is sometimes called the "Father of aviation" - George Cayley
Steam Powered Flight with the Aerial Steam Carriage - John Stringfellow- The world's first powered flight took place at Chard in Somerset 55 years before the Wright brothers attempt at Kitty Hawk
VTOL (Vertical Take-Off and Landing) fighter-bomber aircraft - Hawker P.1127, Designed by Sydney Camm
The first commercial jet airliner (de Havilland Comet)
The first Supersonic Airliner - Concorde. Developed by the British Aircraft Corporation in partnership with Aérospatiale 1969
The first aircraft capable of supercruise - English Electric Lightning
Ailerons - Matthew Piers Watt Boulton
Head-up display (HUD) - The Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) designed the first equipment and it was built by Cintel with the system first integrated into the Blackburn Buccaneer.
Pioneer of parachute design - Robert Cocking
The first human-powered aircraft to make an officially authenticated take-off and flight (SUMPAC) - The University of Southampton
Hale rockets, improved version of the Congreve rocket design that introduced Thrust vectoring - William Hale
SABRE engine- The first hypersonic jet/rocket capable of working in air and space to allow the possibility of HOTOL.
Air Force - Royal Air Force


=== Railways ===
Great Western Railway - Isambard Kingdom Brunel
Stockton and Darlington Railway the world's first operational steam passenger railway
First inter-city steam-powered railway - Liverpool and Manchester Railway


==== Locomotives ====
Blücher - George Stephenson
Puffing Billy -William Hedley
Locomotion No 1 - Robert Stephenson
Sans Pareil - Timothy Hackworth
Stourbridge Lion - Foster, Rastrick and Company
Stephenson's Rocket - George and Robert Stephenson
Salamanca - Matthew Murray
Flying Scotsman- Sir Nigel Gresley


==== Other railway developments ====
Displacement lubricator, Ramsbottom safety valve, the water trough, the split piston ring - John Ramsbottom
Maglev (transport) rail system - Eric Laithwaite
World's first underground railway and the first rapid transit system. It was also the first underground railway to operate electric trains - London underground
Advanced Passenger Train (APT) was an experimental High Speed Train that introduced tilting - British Rail


=== Roads ===
Bowden cable - Frank Bowden
Hansom cab - Joseph Hansom
Seat belt - George Cayley
Sinclair C5 - Sir Clive Sinclair
Tarmac - E. Purnell Hooley
Tension-spoke Wire wheels - George Cayley
Pneumatic Tyre - Robert William Thomson is deemed to be inventor, despite John Boyd Dunlop being initially credited.
Disc brakes - Frederick W. Lanchester
Belisha beacon - Leslie Hore-Belisha
Lotus 25 Considered the first modern F1 race car designed for the 1962 Formula One season. It was a revolutionary design the first fully stressed monocoque chassis to appear in Formula One - Colin Chapman, Team Lotus
Horstmann suspension, tracked armoured fighting vehicle suspension - Sidney Horstmann
Steam fire engine - John Braithwaite
Penny-farthing - James Starley
Dynasphere - John Archibald Purves
Caterpillar Track - Richard Lovell Edgeworth
First manually operated traffic lights installed (gas lamp) - Outside Houses of Parliament, London. 10 December 1868
Mini-roundabout - Frank Blackmore


=== Sea ===
Plimsoll Line - Samuel Plimsoll
Hovercraft - Christopher Cockerell
Lifeboat - Lionel Lukin
Resurgam - George Garrett
Transit (ship) - Richard Hall Gower
Turbinia, the first steam turbine powered steamship, designed by the engineer Sir Charles Algernon Parsons and built in Newcastle upon Tyne
Diving Equipment/Scuba Gear - Henry Fleuss
Diving bell - Edmund Halley
Sextant - John Bird
Octant (instrument) - Independently developed by Englishman John Hadley and the American Thomas Godfrey
Whirling speculum, This device can be seen as a precursor to the gyroscope - John Serson
Screw propeller - Francis Pettit Smith
The world's first patent for an underwater echo ranging device (Sonar) - Lewis Richardson
hydrophone Before the invention of Sonar convoy escort ships used them to detect U-boats, greatly lessening the effectiveness of the submarine - Research headed by Ernest Rutherford
Hydrofoil - John Isaac Thornycroft
HMS Warrior The world's first Iron armoured and iron hulled warship.


== Scientific innovations ==
Logarithms - John Napier (1550–1617)
The theory of electromagnetism - James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) 
The Gregorian telescope - James Gregory (1638–1675) 
The concept of latent heat - Joseph Black (1728–1799) 
The pyroscope, atmometer and aethrioscope scientific instruments: Sir John Leslie (1766–1832) 
Identifying the nucleus in living cells - Robert Brown (1773–1858) 
Hypnotism - James Braid (1795–1860) 
Transplant rejection: Professor Thomas Gibson (1940s) the first medical doctor to understand the relationship between donor graft tissue and host tissue rejection and tissue transplantation by his work on aviation burns victims during World War II.
Colloid chemistry - Thomas Graham (1805–1869) 
The kelvin SI unit of temperature - William Thomson, Lord Kelvin (1824–1907) 
Devising the diagramatic system of representing chemical bonds - Alexander Crum Brown (1838–1922) 
Criminal fingerprinting - Henry Faulds (1843–1930) 
The noble gases: Sir William Ramsay (1852–1916) 
The Cloud chamber - Charles Thomson Rees Wilson (1869–1959) 
Pioneering work on nutrition and poverty - John Boyd Orr (1880–1971) 
The ultrasound scanner - Ian Donald (1910–1987) 
Ferrocene synthetic substances - Peter Ludwig Pauson in 1955 
The MRI body scanner - John Mallard and James Huchinson from (1974–1980) 
The first cloned mammal (Dolly the Sheep): Was conducted in The Roslin Institute research centre in 1996 
Seismometer innovations thereof - James David Forbes 
Metaflex fabric innovations thereof - University of St. Andrews (2010) application of the first manufacturing fabrics that manipulate light in bending it around a subject. Before this such light manipulating atoms were fixed on flat hard surfaces. The team at St Andrews are the first to develop the concept to fabric.
Macaulayite: Dr Jeff Wilson of the Macaulay Institute, Aberdeen.


== Miscellaneous ==
Oldest police force in continuous operation: Marine Police Force founded in 1798 and now part of the Metropolitan Police Service
Oldest life insurance company in the world: Amicable Society for a Perpetual Assurance Office founded 1706
First Glee Club, founded in Harrow School in 1787.
Oldest arts festival - Norwich 1772 
Oldest music festival - The Three Choirs Festival
Oldest literary festival - The Cheltenham Literature Festival
Bayko - Charles Plimpton
Linoleum - Frederick Walton 
Chocolate bar - J. S. Fry & Sons 
Meccano - Frank Hornby
Crossword puzzle - Arthur Wynne
Gas mask - (disputed) John Tyndall and others
Graphic telescope - Cornelius Varley
Steel-ribbed Umbrella - Samuel Fox
Plastic - Alexander Parkes
Plasticine - William Harbutt
Carbonated soft drink - Joseph Priestley
Friction Match - John Walker
Invented the rubber balloon - Michael Faraday
Earliest known concept of a Metric system - John Wilkins
Edmondson railway ticket - Thomas Edmondson
The world's first Nature Reserve - Charles Waterton *Public Park - Joseph Paxton
Scouts - Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell
Spirograph - Denys Fisher
The Young Men's Christian Association YMCA was founded in London - George Williams
The Salvation Army, known for being one of the largest distributors of humanitarian aid - Methodist minister William Booth
Prime meridian - George Biddell Airy
Produced the first complete printed translation of the Bible into English - Myles Coverdale
Founder of the Bank of Scotland - John Holland
Venn diagram - John Venn
Vulcanisation of rubber - Thomas Hancock
Silicone - Frederick Kipping
Pykrete - Geoffrey Pyke
Vantablack - The world's blackest known substance
Stamp collecting - John Edward Gray bought penny blacks on first day of issue in order to keep them
lorgnette - George Adams (optician)
Boys' Brigade 
Bank of England devised by William Paterson
Bank of France devised by John Law
Colour photography: the first known permanent colour photograph was taken by James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) 
Barnardos
Boy Scouts
Girl Guides
RSPCA
RSPB
RNLI


== See also ==
English inventions and discoveries
Irish inventions and discoveries
Royal Society
Science and technology in the United Kingdom
Science in Medieval Western Europe
Scottish inventions and discoveries
Welsh inventions and discoveries


== References ==


== Further reading ==