Peramelidae is the family of marsupials that contains all of the extant bandicoots. One known extinct species of bandicoot, the pig-footed bandicoot, was so different from the other species that it was recently moved into its own family. There are four described fossil peramelids. They are found throughout Australia and New Guinea, with at least some species living in every available habitat, from rain forest to desert.


== Characteristics ==
Peramelids are small marsupials, ranging in size from the mouse bandicoot, which is 15-17.5 cm long, to the giant bandicoot, which at 39-56 cm in length and up 4.7 kilograms in weight, is about the size of a rabbit. They have short limbs and tails, smallish, mouse-like ears, and a long, pointed snout.
Peramelids are omnivorous, with soil-dwelling invertebrates forming the major part of their diet; they also eat seeds, fruit, and fungi. Their teeth are correspondingly unspecialised, with most species having the dental formula 5.1.3.43.1.3.4
Female peramelids have a pouch that opens to the rear, and contains eight teats. The maximum litter size is therefore eight, since marsupial young are attached to the teat during development, although two to four young per litter is a more typical number. The gestation period of peramelids is the shortest among mammals, at just 12.5 days, the young are weaned at around two months of age, and reach sexual maturity at just three months. This allows a given female to produce more than one litter per breeding season, and gives peramelids an unusually high reproductive rate compared with other marsupials.


== Classification ==
Family Peramelidae
Subfamily Peramelinae
Genus Crash†Crash bandicoot† (fossil)

Genus Isoodon: short-nosed bandicoots
Golden bandicoot, Isoodon auratus
Northern brown bandicoot, Isoodon macrourus
Southern brown bandicoot, Isoodon obesulus

Genus Perameles: long-nosed bandicoots
Western barred bandicoot, Perameles bougainville
Eastern barred bandicoot, Perameles gunnii
Long-nosed bandicoot, Perameles nasuta
Desert bandicoot, Perameles eremiana† (extinct)
Perameles allinghamensis† (fossil)
Perameles bowensis† (fossil)
Perameles sobbei† (fossil)

Subfamily Peroryctinae
Genus Peroryctes: New Guinean long-nosed bandicoots
Giant bandicoot, Peroryctes broadbenti
Raffray's bandicoot, Peroryctes raffrayana
cf. Peroryctes tedfordi† (fossil)
cf. Peroryctes sp.† (fossil)

Subfamily Echymiperinae
Genus Echymipera: New Guinean spiny bandicoots
Long-nosed spiny bandicoot, Echymipera rufescens
Clara's spiny bandicoot, Echymipera clara
Menzies' spiny bandicoot, Echymipera echinista
Common spiny bandicoot, Echymipera kalubu
David's spiny bandicoot, Echymipera davidi

Genus Microperoryctes : New Guinean mouse bandicoots
Mouse bandicoot, Microperoryctes murina
Eastern striped bandicoot, Microperoryctes ornata
Western striped bandicoot, Microperoryctes longicauda
Arfak pygmy bandicoot, Microperoryctes aplini
Papuan bandicoot, Microperoryctes papuensis

Genus Rhynchomeles
Seram bandicoot, Rhynchomeles prattorum


== References ==

Groves, C.P. (2005). Wilson, D.E.; Reeder, D.M., eds. Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 39–42. OCLC 62265494. ISBN 0-801-88221-4. 
Schwartz, L.R. (2006). "A new species of bandicot from the Oligocene of Northern Australia and implications for correlating Australian Tertiary mammal faunas". Palaeontology 49 (5): 991–998. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4983.2006.00584.x. 


== External links ==
Gordon, G.; Hulbert, A.J. (1989). "Part 24: Peramelidae". Fauna of Australia Volume 1B Mammalia (PDF). Australian Biological Resources Study (Canberra, Australia: AGPS). ISBN 978-0-644-06056-1. Retrieved 12 February 2011.