The Golden Gloves is the name given to annual competitions for amateur boxing in the United States. The Golden Gloves is often the term used to refer to the National Golden Gloves competition, but it also can represent several other amateur tournaments, including regional golden gloves tournaments and other notable tournaments such as the Intercity Golden Gloves, the Chicago Golden Gloves, and the New York Golden Gloves.
The national contest is sponsored and controlled by the Golden Gloves Association of America, Inc. Winners from regional Golden Gloves competitions compete in the national competition, called the Golden Gloves Tournament of Champions. The Tournament of Champions is held once a year, and a new tournament site is selected annually. The U.S. Golden Gloves program is currently organized on a territorial basis to give all sections of the country representation. All tournaments are planned, promoted and directed by the Golden Gloves Charities and within the limits of the amateur boxing code.
The Golden Gloves are open to all non-professional pugilists age 16 and over who are United States citizens. There is also a Silver Gloves amateur tournament, which is for amateur pugilists age 10 to 15 years old.


== USA FranchisesEdit ==
Alabama Golden Gloves
Buffalo Golden Gloves
Chicago Golden Gloves
Cincinnati Golden Gloves
Cleveland Golden Gloves
Colorado-New Mexico Golden Gloves
Detroit Golden Gloves
Florida Golden Gloves
Hawaii Golden Gloves
Indiana Golden Gloves
Iowa Golden Gloves
Kansas City Golden Gloves
Kansas-Oklahoma Golden Gloves
Knoxville Golden Gloves
Michigan Golden Gloves
Mid-South Golden Gloves
Nevada Golden Gloves
New England Golden Gloves
New Jersey Golden Gloves 
New York Metro Golden Gloves
Omaha Golden Gloves
Oregon Golden Gloves
Pennsylvania Golden Gloves
Rocky Mountain Golden Gloves
St. Louis Golden Gloves
Syracuse Golden Gloves
Texas Golden Gloves
Toledo Golden Gloves
Tri-State Golden Gloves
Upper Midwest Golden Gloves
Washington, D.C. Golden Gloves
Wisconsin Golden Gloves


== Around the WorldEdit ==
Other countries have similar amateur boxing awards, such as Mexico's Guantes De Oro (literally "Gloves Of Gold" in Spanish).


== Diamond BeltEdit ==
In the past certain amateur tournaments would award the victor with a Diamond Belt as recognition of their amateur championship status. These tournaments were sponsored by various organizations and newspapers in the United States with the Philadelphia Inquirer being one of the more notable. Notable Diamond Belt winners include George Foreman, Bobby Chacon, Jimmy McCarter, Logan McElroy, and Lou Brooks.


== Pacific North West Golden GlovesEdit ==
Four major Golden Gloves annual tournaments that have taken place include: BC Golden Gloves, Tacoma Golden Gloves, Seattle Golden Gloves and Oregon Golden Gloves. Some notable Canadian boxers to win championships in two or more of the four locations include Frank Albert Scott, Freddy Stephen Fuller, Earl McLeay, Dick Findlay and Clint Page from the Sixties.


== BC Golden GlovesEdit ==
The annual Golden Gloves tournament in British Columbia, Canada has been a regular event since 1939. The first BC Golden Gloves champions were Alan Dunn, Bob Hickey, Eric Burnell, Henry Devine, Kenny Lindsay, Phil Vickery and Wayne Morris


== Regional and special tournamentsEdit ==
From time to time, there have been special tournaments or regional Golden Gloves tournaments. One that operated from 1954 to the early Sixties was the Vancouver Island Golden Gloves. The first Vancouver Island Golden Boy was Victoria's Bert Wilkinson in 1954. Some of the history was documented in various issues of the Vancouver Island Boxing News in 1983, and the "BC Amateur Boxing News" between November 1983 and January 1986. Also, a poster of the 1954 tournament and a photo of Bert Wilkinson was recently used in a video for the induction ceremony of the Greater Victoria Hall of Fame held in November 2009.


== See alsoEdit ==
Amateur boxing
NCAA Boxing Championship
Spanish Golden Gloves
USA Boxing
Lists of former Golden Gloves champions, by division:
List of US national Golden Gloves super heavyweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves heavyweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves light heavyweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves middleweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves light middleweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves welterweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves light welterweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves lightweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves featherweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves bantamweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves flyweight champions
List of US national Golden Gloves light flyweight champions


== ReferencesEdit ==

https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1842&dat=19930801&id=lV0eAAAAIBAJ&sjid=VcgEAAAAIBAJ&pg=1903,55072


== External linksEdit ==
Official Website
Women's Golden Gloves
Cradle of Champions: 80 Years of the New York Daily News Golden Gloves by Bill Farrell
[1]