This is a list of characters that appear in the Camp Half-Blood chronicles (which consists of the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series and Heroes of Olympus series).


== Main charactersEdit ==


=== Percy JacksonEdit ===

Perseus "Percy" Jackson is a young demigod, the son of the mortal Sally Jackson and the Greek god Poseidon. He is the main protagonist and first-person narrator in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series and one of the 7 main characters in the follow-up Heroes of Olympus series. He appears directly in every book of the two series except The Lost Hero, though he is mentioned in all. Like other half-human demigods, he is expected to act as the Olympian gods' agent in the mortal world, taking action where ancient laws forbid direct godly intervention, usually in the form of quests. He is twelve years old in The Lightning Thief, and 16 years old in The Last Olympian. The Blood of Olympus (the last book of the franchise) ends with Percy and his girlfriend Annabeth Chase planning to finish senior year in New York before heading to the college in New Rome.
The powers he inherited from his father include: controlling water, making hurricanes, breathing underwater, and talking to horses and sea creatures. He is also a notably good swordsman. Percy Jackson's fatal flaw is loyalty, which he does not at first see as a danger. Throughout the series, Percy fights with a ballpoint pen named Anaklusmos (Ancient Greek for "riptide") that changes into a "celestial bronze" sword when it is uncapped (in the books) or clicked (in the movies). He is described as having a "Mediterranean" complexion, with black hair and sea green eyes.
In the films, he is portrayed by Logan Lerman.


=== Annabeth ChaseEdit ===
Annabeth Chase is one of Percy Jackson's closest friends, first appearing as a twelve–year-old who helps nurse him back to health. She is the daughter of the goddess Athena and mortal history professor Frederick Chase. Annabeth has blond hair, stormy gray eyes, and tan skin . As a daughter of Athena, she is naturally intelligent, with a particular gift for strategy. She repeatedly expresses a desire to become an architect, and, at the end of The Last Olympian, she is assigned to redesign the damaged city on Mount Olympus. Her fatal flaw is hubris, and her greatest desire is to "rebuild the world from scratch". She is also described by her teacher Chiron as "territorial about her friends", which is manifested in several moments of jealousy and distrust towards other characters; in particular, toward friends of Percy. In The Lightning Thief, it is revealed that she is afraid of spiders.
Her main weapon is a short celestial bronze knife given to her by Luke Castellan, her old friend (which she loses in The Last Olympian , because he dies). Annabeth also uses a Yankees baseball cap (given to her by her mother) that makes its wearer invisible, and a bronze shield (made by Charles Beckendorf) that shows any location under the sun and can be disguised as a platter. At the end of The Battle of the Labyrinth, Daedalus gives Annabeth his computer of projects that leads her to many great discoveries.
Annabeth runs away from her father and stepfamily at age seven and encounters two other demigods, Luke Castellan and Thalia Grace. They live as runaways until they are found by Grover Underwood, a satyr who has been ordered to escort Thalia back to camp. Annabeth and Percy Jackson grow close during several quests together—although she remains attached to Luke and convinced of his goodness, causing some jealousy and conflict with Percy. Her attempts to bring Luke back into the fold are an important theme in the books.
Annabeth is crucial to several plot elements in the series. Percy undertakes a quest in The Titan's Curse to save her from Atlas's curse. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, she kisses Percy when she thinks he may die. In the final book, The Last Olympian, she once again kisses him and they start dating. After Percy disappears in The Lost Hero, she begins to search for him and encounters three new demigods, Jason Grace, Piper McLean, and Leo Valdez. She continues to search for him in during the first two books of the Heroes of Olympus series. With help from Jason, Piper, and Leo she finds him and a happy reunion occurs. During The Mark of Athena, Annabeth is given the task of restoring the long-lost Athena Parthenos to the Greeks. She also spends some time in Tartarus with Percy and Bob the Titan during the House of Hades. At the end of the series, she and Percy plan to finish high school in New York and then attend college in New Rome.
Annabeth's appearances in the crossover shorts with The Kane Chronicles and the Magnus Chase & The Gods of Asgard series make her the only character who has appeared in all three of the Greco-Roman, Egyptian, and Norse mythology series. She acts as one of the main characters in the former series, while in the latter, she serves as a supporting character who is reunited with her estranged cousin, Magnus, who is secretly a son of a Norse god, Frey.
In the film adaptations, she is portrayed by Alexandra Daddario.


=== Grover UnderwoodEdit ===
Grover Underwood, a satyr, is Percy's best friend. Grover is described as having curly brown hair, brown eyes, pimply skin, a wispy beard, and brown goat-legs (which he disguises with fake feet when necessary). His horns grow larger as the series progresses, and he must take increasingly careful measures to hide them while posing as human. He is a vegetarian. Grover is a very sensitive person, concerned particularly for the safety of nature and nature spirits—and like all satyrs, he can sense the emotions of others around him and smell monsters and demigods. As the series progresses, his concern for his friends and pursuit of his goals lead him to take on leadership roles and become more sure of himself. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, he begins a relationship with the wood nymph Juniper.
He is first seen in The Lightning Thief, where he is disguised as a human student at Percy's school, serving as his "protector". Grover later reveals that if he completes a protector mission, he will receive his "searcher's license", and leave to look for the missing god Pan, his life's ambition. When Polyphemus captures him in The Sea of Monsters, he forms a psychic bond with Percy, called an empathy link, allowing them a limited degree of telepathic communication across great distances. He uses this ability to guide Percy to his rescue. He joins Percy's quest to find Artemis in The Titan's Curse. He eventually finds Pan in The Battle of the Labyrinth, and receives the wild god's spirit, though the Council of Elders do not believe his having witnessed Pan's death. At the end of The Last Olympian, he is named a Lord of the Wild and given a seat on the satyrs' ruling council.
In the film adaptations, Grover is portrayed by Brandon T. Jackson.


== Percy Jackson and the Olympians secondary charactersEdit ==


=== Nico Di AngeloEdit ===
Nico di Angelo is first seen in The Titan's Curse, when several other characters come to his boarding school to bring him and his sister, Bianca di Angelo, to camp. At the end of The Titan's Curse, it is revealed that Nico is the son of Hades. Though he appears to be ten years old and therefore a violation of the "Big Three Oath", it is later discovered that he and his sister were born in the 1940s; and, after having their memories wiped, stayed in the Lotus Hotel and Casino until the present day. He undertakes a quest to discover his history, and learns that his mother was Maria di Angelo, the daughter of an Italian diplomat.
Nico is initially depicted as cheerful and childish, and described as olive skined and dark-haired. He enjoys playing Mythomagic (a Greek-mythology-themed card game similar to Magic: The Gathering) and can quote the fictional statistics of gods and monsters from memory. After Nico learns of Bianca's death in The Titan's Curse, he becomes moody and secretive. From this point on, he is usually described as pale and shaggy-haired, always wearing dark clothing. Nico, despite being an extremely powerful demigod, is depicted also as extremely lonely due to his frightening powers and family reputation, much like Hades himself. He makes many other characters uncomfortable, in part due to his powers over the dead and his unnerving weapon of choice: a sword made of iron cooled in the Styx called Stygian Iron capable of absorbing monsters' essences, rather than simply banishing them to Tartarus.
Nico initially blames Percy for the death of his sister Bianca. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Nico contacts Bianca's ghost and, after learning that holding grudges is a fatal flaw for Hades's children, he lets go of his hatred. From this point on until meeting Cupid in The House of Hades, Nico struggles with an attraction to Percy, developed when Percy first protected him from Dr. Thorn in 'The Titan's Curse', which he considers embarrassing and tries to hide. At the end of The Blood of Olympus, it is implied that he begins a relationship with Will Solace, son of Apollo.
Nico is important to the plots of both Percy Jackson & the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus. Percy makes it his goal to find Nico in The Battle of the Labyrinth, and later undertakes a small quest with the son of Hades in The Last Olympian. In addition, Nico was privy to the fact that there were two camps, one Greek and one Roman, before The Lost Hero, which makes him an important liaison between the two groups during the Heroes of Olympus series. The seven demigod protagonists of the second series also undertake a quest to save him when he is captured by Gaea's forces. Lastly, Nico brought Hazel Levesque, daughter of Pluto and his half-sister, back from the dead and helps her control her dangerous powers.


=== Thalia GraceEdit ===
Thalia Grace (pronounced thal-ee-uh) is the daughter of Zeus and a TV starlet the god met in the 1980s. In The Lost Hero she is revealed to be the older sister of Jason Grace. She runs away from home at age 9 and stays with Luke Castellan and Annabeth Chase until they meet Grover Underwood when she is 12. When the party reaches Camp Half-Blood, Thalia gives her life to hold off pursuing monsters on top of what would later be called Half-Blood Hill. To save Thalia's life, her father transforms her into a pine tree. Her spirit then provides a magical barrier that protects the camp until it is purged from the pine tree by the golden fleece.
Thalia is pursued so fiercely by monsters because she is a violation of the "Big Three Oath", which was a promise between the three eldest male Olympians to have no more children, for fear of "The Great Prophecy" coming true. At the end of The Titan's Curse, she joins the Hunters of Artemis, a band of immortal female archers in service to the goddess Artemis. This freezes her age the night before her sixteenth birthday, taking her out of the running for the prophecy.
Thalia has electric-blue eyes and spiky black hair, and wears dark makeup and punk style clothing. Annabeth remarks that Thalia's personality and character traits—such as her bravery and loyalty—are very similar to Percy's, and the centaur Chiron later says much the same. She also shares some traits with her father Zeus, including sometimes over-the-top pride, confidence, and reactions to betrayal or contradiction. She is also an incredibly skilled warrior, willing to attack even Luke Castellan, recognized as the best swordsman Camp Half-Blood has ever known. Thalia's weapons of choice are at first a shield named Aegis disguised as a silver charm bracelet (this gift from her father causes paralyzing fear in those who see it), and a spear disguised as a Mace canister. After The Titan's Curse, she uses a bow and hunting knives, but still uses Aegis. Her main "power" is the ability to summon lightning and generate electric shocks.
In the film Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, she is portrayed by Canadian actress Paloma Kwiatkowski


=== Luke CastellanEdit ===
Luke Castellan is a 19-year-old demigod (in The Lightning Thief), the son of Hermes and May Castellan. Introduced as the friendly head counselor of the Hermes cabin, he is soon revealed to be a servant of Kronos. Luke is resentful of his father, who adhered to the gods' policy of non-interference, even though Luke's single mother is mentally unbalanced and often fails to be a good caretaker for her son. Luke runs away from home young, meeting up with Annabeth Chase and Thalia Grace and eventually arriving at Camp Half Blood. After the loss of Thalia, a failed quest, and continued silence from his father; his ongoing resentment turns into a strong hatred of not only Hermes, but all the gods.
Luke is described as strikingly handsome with sandy hair, blue eyes (gold when possessed by Kronos), and a long scar on his cheek given to him by Ladon while trying to steal a golden apple from the Garden of the Hesperides. Though described by those who knew him before he joined up with Kronos as an all-around nice guy, his personality takes a turn towards moodiness and violence after he switches "sides". He remains attached to and protective of some of his friends; in particular Annabeth and Thalia.
Luke is first and foremost an excellent swordsman, arguably the best swordsman in Camp Half Blood. He even receives a sword named "Backbiter" from his master Kronos at the end of The Lightning Thief. This sword, which is later reforged as Kronos's scythe, has the ability to harm both mortals and monsters. From the demigod Halcyon Green, he receives a celestial bronze knife and diary; Luke later gives this knife to Annabeth with a promise to always remain her family and entrusts the diary to Chiron. From his father he receives a pair of magic flying shoes, which he later curses and gives to Percy Jackson. He has also inherited an ability to open locks with his mind, along with a cunning nature, from his father. Just before giving himself over completely to host the spirit of Kronos, Luke bathes in the river Styx and obtains the invincibility of Achilles.
Though Luke originally serves Kronos willingly, the horrors he witnesses during the Battle of Manhattan convince him to fight against his former master, eventually committing suicide to stop the Titan. By doing this, Luke proves himself to be the "hero" of the Great Prophecy. As he dies, Luke reiterates what Ethan Nakamura tells Percy earlier: that unclaimed children and unrecognized gods deserve more respect than they have been given. Luke also says that he will try for rebirth rather than stay in the Underworld after his death.
In the movies where he is the main antagonist, he is portrayed by Jake Abel. In this version, as well as being a master swordsman, Luke is also incredibly skilled in unarmed combat, easily overpowering Percy Jackson when the latter was carrying the sword.


=== TysonEdit ===
Tyson is Percy's younger brother. In The Sea of Monsters, he is introduced as Percy's bullied, childish friend. When Percy is forced to take him to Camp Half Blood, it is revealed that he is a baby Cyclops, and a son of Poseidon—making him Percy's half-brother. Percy is at first resentful of him as a brother, while Annabeth is openly hostile towards him, but both accept him after they get to know him better during a quest to the Sea of Monsters.
Tyson is described as tall with unkempt teeth and fingernails, and brown hair and eyes. He is mentally about 8 years old, but fairly intelligent and extremely compassionate. As a son of Poseidon, Tyson has some limited powers over sea creatures and water. As a Cyclops, he is immune to fire and super-strong; has an uncanny ability to mimic voices; has enhanced senses; and can understand the "old tongue" (the language spoken by Gaea to her first children). Tyson also becomes an excellent smith with help from Beckendorf. In The Last Olympian, he proves himself also to be a capable fighter and is named a general of Poseidon's armies. He leads his fellow Cyclops' into the fight with battle cry of "Peanut Butter!"
Tyson is close with several characters and magical creatures in the series. The first is the hippocampus Rainbow. He also befriends the hellhound Mrs. O'Leary. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Tyson is revealed to be afraid of satyrs, including Percy's friend Grover; he manages to conquer this fear after a quest with Grover, and befriends the satyr. In the Heroes of Olympus series, Tyson also begins a romantic relationship with the harpy Ella.
In the Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters movie, he is portrayed by Douglas Smith


=== Rachel Elizabeth DareEdit ===
Rachel is a main character in the later books of the Percy Jackson series and a minor character in the Heroes of Olympus series. Rachel is a mortal girl who can see through the Mist, the force that obscures gods and monsters from most mortals. She first meets Percy in The Titan's Curse at the Hoover Dam. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, she helps Annabeth and Percy by guiding them through the Labyrinth to Daedalus's workshop. It is hinted throughout the series that she harbors romantic feelings for Percy; Annabeth notices this and becomes jealous. In The Last Olympian, she begins having strange visions and becomes the new Oracle of Delphi. Her first act as the Oracle is to deliver the next Great Prophecy about seven heroes, setting the plot of the Heroes of Olympus series. She was a minor character in The Lost Hero, The House of Hades, and The Blood of Olympus.
She is described as having red hair and freckles. She is skilled at painting and drawing, with both feet and hands, and is occasionally shown as a non-ADHD foil for her demigod teammates. Percy remarks on her ability to stand still for long periods of time at a charity event.


=== Clarisse La RueEdit ===
A daughter of Ares and the lead counselor of the Ares cabin at Camp Half-Blood, Clarisse is hot-tempered, courageous, and strong. As the child of a war god, she is an excellent fighter (usually utilizing an electric spear given to her by Ares) and a good military strategist. She can be stubborn and overconfident, much like her father, but often surprises other characters with her loyalty and leadership skills. Despite their similarities, Clarisse has a fear of her father and his anger at her if she should ever disappoint him—this, along with a strong sense of honor and pride, often motivates her actions. She also fears the Labyrinth because of what happened to the demigod Chris Rodriguez when he was inside the huge maze. She is aggressive towards most demigods, including Percy Jackson, though she does respect and make friends with a few: Percy, Annabeth Chase, and Silena Beauregard included. She eventually starts dating Chris Rodriguez.
Clarisse makes frequent appearances throughout the novels, first seen just after Percy Jackson arrives at Camp Half-Blood. In The Sea of Monsters, Clarisse is instrumental in bringing the Golden Fleece to camp. She is a main character in the short story "Percy Jackson and the Stolen Chariot" (published in Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Demigod Files). In The Last Olympian, Clarisse initially sits out the war for Olympus due to a personal feud (like Achilles in the Trojan War). Enraged after the loss of her friend Silena, she later joins the battle with a fury reminiscent of her father's, slaying a drakon singlehandedly and receiving the blessing of Ares. In The Blood of Olympus, Clarisse leads the Greeks in battle to defend the camp.
In the film adaptation, Clarisse is portrayed by Leven Rambin.


== The Heroes of Olympus charactersEdit ==


=== Leo ValdezEdit ===
Leo Valdez is a 15-year-old demigod, a son of Hephaestus, and the one of seven protagonists of The Heroes of Olympus. Leo is described as looking like a "Latino Santa's Elf" with curly black hair, dark brown eyes, a cheerful face, a slim build, and a mischievous smile. He is a Hispanic-American who speaks fluent Spanish. He befriends Jason at the "Wilderness School", although it is later revealed that everything that happened prior to the Grand Canyon museum trip is actually a trick of the Mist. Leo has the ability to create and manipulate fire, a skill that no son of Hephaestus has had in 400 years, and is also immune to heat/fire. He is also an excellent mechanic due to his father's abilities and has experience working with machines, as his mother was also a mechanic. He repairs a bronze dragon that was previously running wild in the camp's woods, renaming it Festus. He also creates the Argo II, a ship the seven sail on to reach Greece.
Leo tends to fall quickly for girls. He develops a crush on the minor goddess Khione in the first novel of the series. In The Mark of Athena, it is hinted he might have feelings for Hazel Levesque. Hazel discovers that Leo resembles her former boyfriend, Sammy Valdez. She suspects Sammy may be an ancestor of Leo's; in The Mark of Athena the two discover Sammy was Leo's great-grandfather. In The House of Hades, he falls in love with Calypso, daughter of Atlas, during his stay in Ogygia. Leo also uses his sarcasm and wit to hide his feelings, especially in regards to having been the cause of his mother's death. He also has a tendency to think of himself as the "seventh wheel" of the group, though he is just as important as the other six demigods of the quest.
In The Blood of Olympus, Leo plays a crucial role in defeating Gaea. He sacrifices himself to annihilate Gaea, and dies in the process. He is later brought back to life using the Physician's Cure (administered by Festus, his mechanical dragon) and returns for Calypso on Ogygia.


=== Piper McLeanEdit ===
Piper McLean is a daughter of Aphrodite and the famous actor Tristan McLean. She is fifteen in The Lost Hero. Unlike most children of Aphrodite, Piper is not particularly concerned with beauty or fashion. Piper is mostly Cherokee on her father's side, and it is said that "[Her father] didn't really know what else [she was ethnically]". She has tan skin, eyes that change color constantly, and choppy caramel/chocolate-colored hair which she cuts herself. She is slim build and of average height. Her demigod "powers" include "charmspeak" (essentially, magical persuasion) and the ability to speak French. She is also occasionally able to see visions in her magic dagger Katoptris (meaning looking glass in Ancient Greek), which once belonged to Helen of Troy. It is unclear whether this is due to the knife's magic or her own.
Piper's relationship with her father is mutually affectionate but strained, in part because of the small amount of attention he spares for her. When she was young, Piper used her persuasive skills to "borrow" things (such as a car, lawn mower, etc.) just to earn a little of his time. After he is kidnapped by the giant Enceladus in The Lost Hero and subsequently rescued by Piper, Jason Grace, and Leo Valdez; Mr. McLean's relationship with his daughter begins to improve. Piper is also very close to another character: Jason Grace. Though she later learns it was all a trick of the Mist, she was once his girlfriend while they attended the same school. She works hard to recreate this relationship in real life when she comes to Camp Half-Blood. She is also friends with all of the seven quest members in The Heroes of Olympus, especially Annabeth Chase.
Piper's main weapon is her dagger Katoptris, though she later acquires a magic cornucopia and uses it as a weapon. After being captured by pirates in The House of Hades, Piper asks Hazel Levesque to teach her sword fighting, using a jagged celestial bronze sword taken from one of the Boreads.


=== Jason GraceEdit ===
Jason Grace is a son of Jupiter (mythology) and the mortal Beryl Grace, and younger brother of Thalia Grace. Jason has few memories of his mother, who was compelled to give him up when he was two, but he remembers enough about Thalia to not be surprised when he sees her again. Thalia reveals that their mother told her that Jason was dead, and that this was what finally drove her to leave home. He grew up at Camp Jupiter, the Roman equivalent of Camp Half-Blood, where demigods born to the Olympians' Roman aspects receive their training. In The Lost Hero, he begins a romantic relationship with the demigod Piper McLean.
Jason is described as having blond hair, blue eyes, and a scar above his upper lip (according to Thalia, this is the result of an attempt to eat a stapler when he was two). He is of above-average height, with an athletic build and muscular arms. He has a tattoo burned under his forearm, with twelve straight lines like a bar code, an eagle, and the letters SPQR over the lines. The tattoo symbolizes his twelve years of service in the Twelfth Legion Fulminata at Camp Jupiter; the eagle is a symbol of Jupiter. By the age of fifteen, he had earned the rank of praetor and led the legion with his longtime quest partner, Reyna. Jason also coordinated the Roman camp's attack on the Titan force. He led an assault against Mount Othrys, a Titan stronghold near San Francisco, and defeated the Titan Krios in combat, much as Percy Jackson defeated Kronos.
Of all the characters in the series, Jason is the one who struggles the most with the differences between the Greek and Roman perspectives. Piper McLean describes Jason as very rule- and duty-oriented, though the Roman god Terminus describes him as a "rule-flouter." However, when his former compatriot Reyna sees him again in The Mark of Athena, she comments that he seems to have lost some of his Roman qualities. When the Argo II is stuck in North Africa, he realizes that he must choose one identity or the other. He chooses to consider himself a Greek, despite his parentage, and is later unable to command a legion of ghosts sworn to obey only Roman officers. During The House of Hades it is revealed that Jason has plans to return to Camp Jupiter to improve it with things he learned at Camp Half-Blood, such as giving the fauns (the Roman equivalent of a satyr) more rights and responsibilities. Later, during The Blood of Olympus, Jason decides to consider both the Greek and Roman traditions as part of his heritage. He becomes "Pontifex Maximus", a role which will see him travel between Camp Half-Blood and Camp Jupiter to build shrines for every god and goddess in the pantheon, allowing him to stay in touch with both sides.
Although Jason and Percy immediately recognize that it is best to work together, and become friends, their relationship is not without antagonism. As Percy puts it, it is natural for two powerful demigods to wonder which of them is stronger after a fight. Jason is a sword fighter like Percy, though they have different fighting styles. Jason uses an Imperial gold sword, styled as a Roman gladius, which he can extend into a pilum at will. It is possible that this is a trait common to all Roman demigods, as Reyna is also shown as able to turn her sword into a pilum. Jason also has power over air currents and can fly. He can sense and control some air spirits and has, like Thalia, called down lightning, which he conducts through his Imperial Gold weapons, even underwater. On one occasion, he and Percy together summon a hurricane in Charleston harbor. Like his sister, Jason can also emit static shocks, which seem to be tied to his emotions.


=== Hazel LevesqueEdit ===
Hazel Levesque is a thirteen-year-old demigod, a daughter of Pluto (mythology) and Marie Levesque. She first appears in the book The Son of Neptune, at Camp Jupiter. It is later revealed that she has returned from the dead. She grew up in the 1940s in New Orleans, where her mother had a gris-gris shop. When she was born, Pluto offered to grant her mother a wish, but her request for wealth backfired into a curse. As Hazel grew older, precious metals and gems would frequently come up out of the ground near her, more frequently if she was nervous. Her "wealth" was cursed, however, and brought misfortune to anyone who bought them from her mother. Gaea later convinces Hazel's mother to take her to Alaska by citing Hazel as a "cursed child", and tries to use Hazel's power over earth to resurrect her eldest son, the giant Alcyoneus, with a body made out of precious metals and stones. When Hazel's mother changes her mind about helping Gaea, Hazel buries herself and her mother under the earth, delaying Alcyoneus's rebirth and killing them both. While Hazel's spirit is being judged, she gives up the chance to go to Elysium to save her mother from punishment, and they are both sent to the Fields of Asphodel instead.
At some point before The Lost Hero, Nico di Angelo finds Hazel in the Underworld while investigating an imbalance between life and death. He helps her escape to the world of the living and arranges for her to join Camp Jupiter. Hazel and Nico are protective of each other, much as true step-siblings. In The Son of Neptune, Hazel joins Frank Zhang and Percy on a quest to free Thanatos, who tells her that her father, the Lord of the Dead, has not put out a "warrant" for her capture. By doing this, he has allowed her to live, but also doomed her to never be in contact with him again, because he can't be seen openly flouting the rules of his own kingdom.
Hazel had a boyfriend, Sammy Valdez, in 1941. She later learns that Leo Valdez, who resembles him closely, is Sammy's great-grandson. Hazel's primary love interest during the series is Frank Zhang, though she hesitates to call either him or Sammy her "boyfriend" because of the word's different connotations in the present, versus its meaning in the 1940s. She refers to having known and been friends with Jason before his disappearance. She also tames the highly-intelligent horse Arion, who eats precious metals.
Hazel is described as African American, having cocoa-colored skin, curly cinnamon-brown hair, and golden eyes. Her legion tattoo is described as looking like a cross with curved arms and a head. She eventually learns to manipulate her curse, manipulating precious stones and metals and sensing structures underground. She is an accomplished horse-rider and skilled with a spatha'. She is unusually knowledgeable about the Underworld because of her time there. During The House of Hades the goddess Hecate insists that Hazel learn to use "magic", manipulating the Mist to create and break through illusions.
Hazel becomes centurion of the Fifth Cohort in "The Blood of Olympus".


=== Frank ZhangEdit ===
Frank Zhang is a 16-year-old demigod, son of Mars (mythology) and a Chinese-Canadian "legacy" (descendant of a demigod) who dies during military service in Afghanistan. He is taken care of by his grandmother after his mother's death, and makes his way to Camp Jupiter upon her insistence. Frank's family descends from Periclymenus, a grandson of Poseidon, who had the power to shapeshift. Periclymenus's descendants were sold into slavery in China, and migrated to Canada many years later. While battling Alcyoneus (who is invincible within Alaska), Frank taps into his ancestral power and transforms into an elephant. However, his combined power of being a son of Mars and having the ability to shapeshift makes his life very fragile. The Fates tied his life force to a piece of firewood when he was a baby; if the wood burns up, he will die (as in the ancient Greek legend of Meleager). The goddess Juno appears to his mother and grandmother while he is a baby to warn them of this fact, as he would be crucial to defeating the Giants. In all his life, Frank has ignited the wood twice, which he can do simply by thinking about it; the first time is while he is finding his way to Camp Jupiter, in bitter cold. The second time is when he, Percy, and Hazel travel to Alaska to free Thanatos. And in the "House of Hades" Leo uses a fireproof pouch to put the piece of firewood in.
Frank has a meek disposition and is uncomfortable upon learning his father's identity publicly, in front of the whole of Camp Jupiter. He suspected himself a son of Apollo, given his skill with a bow and arrow. On his quest in The Son of Neptune, and later during the series as well, he uses an enchanted spear given to him by Mars. To Frank's surprise, the spear summons a skeleton warrior that defeats the basilisks. Frank calls this skeleton "Gray".
Frank was described as 'cuddly' and 'fuzzy' and with a chubby, babyish face in The Mark of Athena, but in The House of Hades, after summoning the blessing of Ares to defeat a hoard of enemies, he transforms. He is then described as being taller, more muscular, and without all his childhood fat. Though now built like a professional football player, he is still as sensitive as before, and is embarrassed at his new appearance at first.
Initially, he was wary of the tension between Hazel and Leo, as Leo reminded Hazel of her old boyfriend, Sammy Valdez. After Leo's encounter with Calypso, however, Leo became more relaxed around Hazel and there were no more signs of anything other than friendship, much to Frank's relief. He then pursues a relationship with Hazel.


=== Reyna Ramírez-ArellanoEdit ===
Reyna Avila Ramírez-Arellano is 16 years old. She is a minor protagonist of the The Heroes of Olympus series. She is a demigod daughter of Bellona living at Camp Jupiter, and the younger sister of Hylla, the current queen of the Amazons. She was born in Puerto Rico and worked for Circe during the events of Sea of Monsters. She is described as intimidating and a natural leader; she has glossy black hair and black eyes. Reyna is generally more used to responsibility and the demands of leadership than many other demigods, as she is a praetor at Camp Jupiter—a title which she holds alone after the disappearance of her comrade Jason. Reyna's demigod "power" is the ability to lend her strength, bravery, and courage to others near her.
Reyna is often accompanied by her dogs, Aurum and Argentum (Gold and Silver, who can sense if someone is lying) as well as her pegasus Scipio "Skippy". Scipio is put down by Reyna at end of The House of Hades after extreme exhaustion and being poisoned, much to Reyna's dismay. Reyna seems to have a soft spot for animals. The immortal winged-horse named Pegasus recognizes this and awards her the title of "Horse Friend", an honor he has not bestowed for generations, because of her actions toward his descendants.
At the beginning of The Son of Neptune, she does not like Percy Jackson because he destroyed her childhood home on Circe's island, but she comes to regard him as a friend, ally, and possibly a love interest. In The Blood of Olympus more of her personal history is revealed as she, Nico, and Coach Hedge go on a quest to return the Athena Parthenos to Camp Half-Blood. While shadow-travelling on their way to New York, the trio stops in Reyna's home town of San Juan. While there, Reyna and the questers visit her old house while escaping from the Amazons. There are several ghosts there, all calling Reyna a traitor and murderer. Reyna reveals to Nico di Angelo that the Ramirez-Arellano family has always been favored by Bellona. Reyna's father fell in love with the goddess, but later showed symptoms of PTSD and paranoia. When Reyna was ten years old, he became a mania, a ghost in which only is worst qualities of a formerly-living person remain. When the mania attacked Hylla, young Reyna had picked up the closest weapon and unknowingly killed her father. Reyna is reluctant to discuss the incident because patricide is "unforgivable" in New Rome.


=== Coach Gleeson HedgeEdit ===
Gleeson Hedge is a warlike satyr of Camp Half-Blood who has a prominent role in the The Heroes of Olympus series, though he is first mentioned in The Last Olympian as the writer of a letter sent to Grover. Like Grover, Hedge is also a guide for new demigods in searching for Camp Half-Blood, with one of the demigods being Clarisse La Rue. He disguises himself as a coach in the Wilderness School to oversee Piper and Leo (and later, Jason) before escorting them to Camp Half-Blood. He also serves as the adult chaperone for the crew of Argo II, assisting the demigods in their journey, and later accompanies Reyna and Nico to take the Athena Parthenos to Camp Half-Blood. Despite his toughness, Hedge does care for his comrades, but shows strictness towards the veterans (Percy, Annabeth, Jason, Nico, and Reyna). His favorite things are baseball bats, Chuck Norris, and screaming "DIE!" whenever the time arises. In The Lost Hero, Hedge falls in love with Mellie the cloud nymph and marries her; by the time of The House of Hades, Mellie is already pregnant with a satyr boy, Chuck, who is born at the end of The Blood of Olympus with Clarisse as his godmother.


=== Hylla Ramírez-ArellanoEdit ===
Hylla Ramírez-Arellano is the older sister of Reyna, the praetor of Camp Jupiter; she is 22 years old. She is a demigod daughter of Bellona and the Amazon Queen. She looks a lot like Reyna with beautiful, glossy black hair and black eyes, long lashes, and a scar on her forehead. She as her sister had the bearing of a swordswoman but stronger. Hylla wears a black suit with a golden belt. Reyna describes her sister as a "chameleon" because she is always changing. They have similar personalities but Hylla seems more funny and "chill". She was born in Puerto Rico and worked for Circe during the first series with her sister. She also spent a year living with pirates and winning the crew's respect.
She had an awful childhood, basically she was always trying to protect her sister from their dad. Her father was in the army and the whole Ramírez-Arellano family was favored by Bellona. While worshiping her, Hylla's father falls in love with the idea of war and Bellona. They have the two kids together. Later, the father shows symptoms of PTSD. It turned out he had become a mania, or an insane soul with the worst qualities, and was no longer human. The mania knocks out Hylla, Reyna think she is dead and unknowingly kills her father, who was, technically, already dead. All that was left was the crazed and obsessed remnants of the soul.
In "The Blood of Olympus", the Amazon have been working with The Hunters of Artemis who kidnap Reyna and take her to an Amazon headquarters, where Hylla reunites with her sister. Orion breaks into the Amazon HQ and kills every Hunter and Amazon, but the girls escape to their old house, and try to defeat Orion without success. Hylla orders Reyna to leave because she had to stay in combat with the supervivients, hunters, and some Amazons. Though she is never seen afterwards, Orion later confirms that Hylla is still alive after battling him, much to Reyna's relief.


=== Buford the TableEdit ===
Buford is a walking table that Leo Valdez saved from a supply closet and prefers to be polished by Lemon Pledge instead of Windex. He assists Leo Valdez in constructing the Argo II in Bunker 9. Eventually, Leo programs a talking mini-hologram of Gleeson Hedge onto Buford.


== Olympian GodsEdit ==
Zeus/Jupiter – The 1st Olympian and the King of the Gods, Zeus is most prominent in The Lightning Thief but has only small roles in the rest of Percy Jackson & the Olympians. Zeus is shown prominently throughout the series to be extremely narcissistic, paranoid and a fierce hypocrite. In The Lost Hero, under the influence of Khione, Zeus forbids contact between gods and mortals and closes off Olympus, although he indirectly helps the protagonists several times on their quests, such as answering his Jason's prayer for aid against Enceladus. In the film adaption, Zeus is played by Sean Bean.
Hera/Juno – The 2nd Olympian and the Queen of the Gods, she plays a role in The Titan's Curse, by helping Percy and the others on their quest in The Battle of the Labyrinth. As Juno in The Lost Hero, she is kidnapped by Gaea, and contacts Jason Grace to rescue her. Previously, as Juno, she had sneaked out of Olympus and switched Percy and Jason to try to unite the Roman and Greek demigods, going against the wishes of Zeus as part of a plan to defeat Gaea. In the film adaptation, Hera is played by Erica Cerra.
Achelous – A River God with the face of a man and the head of a bull. He had previously fought with Hercules where Hercules removed one of Achelous' horns; his other horn plays a part in the plot of The Mark of Athena.
Aeolus – The Master of the Four Winds. In The Last Olympian, he manipulates the winds to form a barrier around Olympus that protects it from air attacks from the Titans. In The Lost Hero, he is portrayed as frenetic and unbalanced by attempting to fill all the requests of the gods and hopes to be made god of the Wind. He hosts a weather report that airs every 12 minutes.
Amphitrite – The Wife of Poseidon. She appears in one scene of The Last Olympian and is described as a beautiful goddess wearing armor, with black hair and small horns like crab claws.
Anemoi – The four Wind Gods.
Boreas/Aquilon – The God of the North Wind. Boreas was first seen in The Lost Hero where Jason, Piper, and Leo ask for assistance. He has two immortal children called the Boreads and is the father of Khione.
Notus/Auster – The God of the South Wind. He appears in The House of Hades.
Zephyrus/Favonius – The God of the West Wind. He appears in The House of Hades.

Aphrodite/Venus – The 10th Olympian and the Goddess of Love and Beauty. Aphrodite first appears briefly in The Titan's Curse. Her appearance shifts constantly, always becoming more beautiful. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Aphrodite is played by Serinda Swan.
Apollo – The 7th Olympian and the God of the Sun, Light, Music, Truth, and Healing. Apollo drives a flying red Maserati Spyder convertible across the sky, always west. He appears to be about 17 or 18 years old with sandy-colored hair, sky-blue eyes, and dazzling white teeth. Unlike the other Olympian gods, he doesn't have a Roman side due to both sides having the same name. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Apollo is played by Dimitri Lekkos.
Ares/Mars – The 5th Olympian and the God of War and father of Clarisse La Rue and Frank Zhang (as Mars). Ares is a callous bully who is driven by either greed, aggression, violence or by the promise of violence. However, as Mars, he dislikes war without reason and is one of the more important Roman Gods. He is however still a bully and is all for killing the Greeks. Percy first encounters Ares in The Lightning Thief, in which he drives a large black Harley-Davidson motorcycle with flame decals and a leather seat made from human skin. Percy defeats Ares in a sword fight near the climax of the book. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Ares is played by Ray Winstone.
Artemis/Diana – The 8th Olympian and the Goddess of the Moon, Wild Animals, Youth, and Hunting. Artemis is the twin sister of Apollo. Artemis, true to her vows, is a misandrist who discourages the companionship or value of men, and encourages maidenhood. As a result, she has no demigod children, but recruits Hunters who serve as her companions and attendants. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Artemis is played by Ona Grauer.
Asclepius – The God of Healing who is the son of Apollo. The Lar Vitellius is a Legacy of Asclepius. In "The Blood of Olympus," Asclepius is first mentioned by Apollo on Delos, as the only person to have ever successfully cured death. Apollo gives Leo, Frank and Hazel his location in Epidaurus. Piper, Leo and Jason later meet Asclepius in the Asclepion. He quickly diagnoses Jason with myopia and gives him a pair of glasses. Later, he uses the Pylosian mint (the "cursed" daisy) and the Makhai to formulate the physician's cure and gives the trio instructions on its use.
Athena/Minerva – The 6th Olympian and the Goddess of Wisdom and Battle Strategy. Athena first appears in The Titan's Curse, where she dislikes Percy and his relationship with her daughter, and votes to execute Percy due to his crucial role in the fate of Olympus. She then argues that it was the most logical and wise choice. As Minerva, she is a scatter brain and lost. She hates the Romans for reducing her to that and tells her descendants to kill the Romans. She also leads her best children to the Athena Parthenos, although Aphrodite believes it to be subconscious, as Athena doesn't know where it is. Her color scheme is grey. In the film adaptation, Athena is played by Melina Kanakaredes.
Bellona - The Roman Goddess of War. She is the mother of Hylla and Reyna. Though she is never seen in the series, in The Blood of Olympus, she indirectly helps Reyna to kill the giant Orion by empowering her with her strength.
Deimos – The God of Terror. A son of Ares, Deimos only appears in the short story "Percy Jackson and the Stolen Chariot" in The Demigod Files, where he torments Clarisse, forcing Percy and Clarisse cooperate to defeat him.
Delphin – The God of Dolphins. Delphin is one of Poseidon's lieutenants in the war against Oceanus. He was seen briefly during a war council meeting in Poseidon's palace in The Last Olympian, in the shape of a dolphin.
Demeter/Ceres – The 4th Olympian and the Goddess of Agriculture. She thinks the answer to everything is farming-related. Demeter made few appearances in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series. She and her daughter Persephone appear in The Last Olympian, where they participate in the battle against the Titans. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Demeter is played by Stefanie von Pfetten.
Dionysus/Bacchus – The 12th Olympian and the God of Wine and Parties. Dionysus was made the head of Camp Half-Blood as punishment for pursuing "an off-limits wood nymph" romantically. Dionysus is portrayed as an extremely cynical and unfriendly misanthrope who does not appear to have much respect for other beings, except for Ariadne. He is a powerful God, but his powers are shown the least throughout the series. He has two demigod sons in the series who are named after Castor and Pollux. Dionysus hates his job and has a low opinion of demigods like Theseus's abandonment of Ariadne. Dionysus is played by Luke Camilleri in the first film and by Stanley Tucci in the second.
East River – A River God who personifies the river in New York. The East River only appears in The Last Olympian, where he sinks Titan ships coming to attack Olympus for half a sand dollar given to him by Percy. He is a rival of Hudson River.
Elpis/Spes – The Goddess of Hope. She remains in Pandora's pithos as the only thing for humans to keep when other evils were released to the world. In The Last Olympian, the pithos is given by Percy to Hestia by the reasoning that hope remains the safest in hearth. In The Blood of Olympus, Gaea times her awakening to coincide with the Feast of Spes, a Roman festival honoring the goddess that falls on August 1.
Eris – The Goddess of Chaos and the daughter of Nyx. In The House of Hades, Percy and Annabeth encounter Eris alongside Nyx and Eris' siblings near the Mansion of Night.
Eros/Cupid – The God of Love who is the son of Aphrodite and Ares. In The House of Hades, Jason and Nico convinced Cupid to give them Diocletian's Scepter. He eventually gives it to them after Nico admits that he has feelings for Percy. Jason muses that he prefers Aphrodite's version of love to Cupid's.
Ganymede – The Gods' Cup-Bearer. He appears only in the film version of The Sea of Monsters, in a public service announcement advising users of the Gray Sisters' taxi service to use the seat belt. In Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, Ganymede is played by Richard Yearwood.
Hades/Pluto – The unofficial 13th Olympian and the God of the Underworld. Hades, like Zeus and Poseidon, is considered an "elder god," one of the most powerful to be born of Kronos and Rhea. The eldest and most intelligent of the Big Three, Hades is an isolationist who distances himself constantly from other Gods because they do the same to him, out of fear. They continuously underestimate Hades, who is in fact a very honorable and fatherly individual. He is the father of Nico, Bianca, and Hazel. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Hades is played by Steve Coogan and is depicted as also having a fiery winged demon form.
Hebe – The Goddess of Youth who is the daughter of Zeus and Hera. Hebe is among the minor gods who allied themselves with the Titans in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series.
Hecate – The Titan-Goddess of Magic. Hecate is an ally of Kronos in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series, but switches sides by Heroes of Olympus. Her empousai minions and her daughter Circe torment Percy in The Battle of the Labyrinth and The Sea of Monsters, respectively. After the Titans are defeated, she reconciles with Olympus and is granted Cabin 20 at Camp Half-Blood for her children. In The House of Hades, she helps Hazel defeat the giant Clytius.
Hephaestus/Vulcan – The 9th Olympian and the Gods' Blacksmith. Hephaestus is the father of Charles Beckendorf and Leo Valdez. At Camp Half-Blood, Cabin 9 is dedicated to him. Hephaestus acts as a major ally of Percy in The Battle of the Labyrinth. In The Lost Hero, he defies Zeus by speaking to Leo through his dreams and he delivers the head of the mechanical dragon Festus for use as the figurehead for the Argo II. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Hephaestus is played by Conrad Coates.
Heracles/Hercules – Heracles was mentioned but did not appear in the first book series, usually when monsters that he had fought show up to trouble Percy. In The Titan's Curse, it is revealed that Zoë Nightshade helped Heracles steal the Apples of the Hesperides and gave him a magical sword, Riptide, which he had forgotten to return, leaving her to be disowned by her sisters and giving her no credit for her help. Hercules appears as a god in The Mark of Athena where he was tasked by Zeus to guard the Pillars of Hercules and issues Piper and Jason a quest for permission to enter the Mediterranean Sea.
Hermes/Mercury – The 11th Olympian and the Messenger of the Gods who is also the God of Travelers and Thieves. In the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series, Hermes helps Percy, hoping that he will be able to redeem Luke. All unclaimed demigods are packed into Hermes' cabin called Cabin 11 because Hermes welcomes all travelers. In the film adaptations, Hermes is played by Dylan Neal in the first film and by Nathan Fillion in the second.
Hestia/Vesta – The Goddess of the Hearth and Home. Hestia gives up her golden throne on Olympus to Dionysus/Bacchus in order to keep the peace on the Olympian counsel. She is the title character of The Last Olympian, wherein she helps Percy figure out how to defeat Kronos. She is described as preferring the shape of a young girl with a soft voice. In Percy Jackson's Greek Gods, Percy speculates that she may have helped Prometheus give fire to humans out of kindness. She does not mind being overlooked.
Hudson River – A River God who personifies the river in New York. Hudson River only appears in The Last Olympian, where he sinks Titan ships coming to attack Olympus for half a sand dollar given to him by Percy. He is a rival of East River.
Hypnos - The God of Sleep. He has Cabin 15 at Camp Half-Blood.
Iris – The Goddess of Rainbows. Iris administers a network of rainbows, used by demigods and Olympians to communicate remotely. She is the mother of Butch, who makes a small appearance in The Lost Hero. In The Son of Neptune, she meets Frank, Percy, and Hazel.
Janus – The God of Gates, Doorways, Beginnings, and Endings. He appears as a minor character in The Battle of the Labyrinth. He has two faces, and each face seems to think the exact opposite of what the other face thinks.
Khione – The Goddess of Winter who is daughter of Boreas and the sister of the Boreads. She first appears in The Lost Hero when she betrays Jason, Piper, and Leo to the forces of Gaea.
Kymopoleia – An oceanic goddess and a daughter of Poseidon. She is bethroted to Briares the Hekatonkheires, whom she resents. In The Blood of Olympus, Kymopoleia works with Polybotes to hinder the demigods while sailing through the Aegean Sea after feeling abandoned by her father. She is convinced by Jason to switch sides. Together, they kill Polybotes. She is nicknamed "Kym" by Jason.
Lares – Household Gods and ancestor spirits who are guardians at Camp Jupiter.
Cato – A Lar. In The Son of Neptune, Cato was seen at the senate meeting where Frank Zhang is made a Centurion.
Vitellius – A Lar who is a descendant of Asclepius. In The Son of Neptune, he was first seen when Hazel was introducing Percy to him.

Morpheus – The God of Dreams. He is among the minor gods that appears as an ally of Kronos in The Last Olympian. He puts the entire city of New York to sleep during the battle.
Melinoe – The Goddess of Ghosts. Melinoe lives in the underworld; her body is half chalky white, half pitch-black. She appears only in The Demigod Files in the short story "Percy Jackson and the Sword of Hades," where she scares people by showing them the ghosts of deaths they regret.
Nike/Victoria – The Goddess of Victory. Leo Valdez, Hazel Levesque, Frank Zhang, and Percy Jackson meet her in "The Blood of Olympus". She is also on the Athena Parthenos in Athena's hand. Her children are in Cabin 17 at Camp Half-Blood.
Nemesis – The Goddess of Vengeance and mother of the late Ethan Nakamura. Nemesis is seen in The Mark of Athena where she makes a deal with Leo.
Palaemon – The God of Sharks. Palaemon is one of Poseidon's lieutenants in the war against Oceanus.
Pan – The late God of the Wild. Pan has been missing for over 2000 years. The satyrs seek him fervently. After Percy and his friends find Pan in The Battle of the Labyrinth, he dies peacefully and releases his spirit to Percy, Grover, Rachel, and Annabeth.
Persephone/Proserpine – The Goddess of Springtime and Queen of the Underworld. Persephone is the wife of Hades, and the daughter of Demeter and Zeus. Hades only allows her to visit Demeter, her mother, in the spring and summer. She is said to be able to "soften" Hades and make him more merciful. Unlike most minor gods, she sides with Olympus during the war against the Titans. In the film adaptation, Persephone is played by Rosario Dawson.
Phobos – The God of Fear. A son of Ares, Phobos only appears in the "Percy Jackson and the Stolen Chariot" story in The Demigod Diaries, where he torments Clarisse. He has the power to show people their greatest fears, but Percy and Clarisse cooperate to defeat him. In The Blood of Olympus, a statue of Phobos is used by Piper to kill Mimas, which fulfills the requirement of "one god and one demigod cooperating" in killing giants.
Pompona – The Roman Goddess of Plenty. Pompona isn't seen in person, but a statue of her speaks in The Last Olympian, becoming irritated when she is mistaken for Demeter by Percy, throwing bronze apples at Percy and Will Solace.
Poseidon – The 3rd Olympian and the God of the Sea, Earthquakes, and Horses who is the brother of Zeus and Hades. In The Lightning Thief, he is suspected of having stolen Zeus's master bolt but is proven innocent after Percy recovers it. Poseidon fights Oceanus in the underwater front of the Titan war. He remains there in The Last Olympian while the other Olympians fight Typhon, until Percy convinces him that his power is necessary to defeat Typhon. He was last seen fishing for giant sea serpents on Long Island Sound outside Camp Half-Blood. Though he is referred to as Neptune in later books, he has yet to appear in Roman form. In the film adaptation of The Lightning Thief, Poseidon is played by Kevin McKidd.
Terminus – The Roman God of Boundaries. In The Son of Neptune, Terminus is portrayed as obsessive-compulsive and obsessed with order. He guards the city limits of New Rome. He also helps Percy defeat the giant Polybotes.
Thanatos – The God of Death. Thanatos is a lieutenant of Hades. In The Son of Neptune, the forces of Gaea capture Thanatos, allowing their dead allies to quickly return to life. He resumes his duties after being rescued by Percy, Hazel, and Frank.
Tiberinus – A River God. Tiberinus appears to Annabeth in The Mark of Athena. He guides her to the beginning of the Roman leg of her quest for the Athena Parthenos. To Annabeth, he looks exactly like Gregory Peck.
Triptolemus – The God of Farming who is associated with Demeter. In The House of Hades, he protected Hazel, Frank, and Nico from the Katoblepones.
Triton – Triton is a Sea God and Poseidon's "son and heir." He is depicted as a merman with two fishtails. He acts arrogant toward Percy but respects Tyson.
Tyche/Fortuna – The Goddess of Luck. She is awarded Cabin 19 at Camp Half-Blood after the Second Titanomachy. Her Roman counterpart, Fortuna, is celebrated by Camp Jupiter in the "Feast of Fortuna" on June 24 every year to decide what fortune that would befall the camp.


== Primordial DeitiesEdit ==
Gaea/Terra – The embodiment of Earth who is the primary antagonist of The Heroes of Olympus series. Gaea is the mother of the Titans, the Giants, and Antaeus. She is the grandmother of the Olympians, whose rule she resents. As of The Son of Neptune, she remains sleeping in the ground, but retains some consciousness and influence. Like Kronos, she commands an army of mythological figures and monsters dissatisfied with the Olympians. During The Blood of Olympus, she is defeated by Leo Valdez, Piper McLean and Jason Grace who lift her into the sky, charm her to sleep and then incinerate her with a mighty blast of fire combined with a shot from an onager by Octavian. As a goddess she can't be killed, but like her son Kronos, her essence is scattered so much she hopefully will never able to form a consciousness again.
Akhlys – The Goddess of Misery and a daughter of Chaos and Night. She is described as a miserable-looking old woman who carries the Aegis shield with Medusa's head carved into it. In The House of Hades, she offers the Death Mist to Percy and Annabeth, but later betrays them by luring them into Nyx's territory and trying to kill them with poison. In anger, Percy manipulates the poison back at Akhlys, causing her to run away in fear. This is the first time that Annabeth sees the darker part of Percy's personality.
Keto – A Primordial Sea God in Greek Mythology and the sister of Phorcys. In The Mark of Athena, Keto appeared as a girl named Kate who is encountered in Phorcys' aquarium. When Gleeson Hedge discovered Phorcys' ruse, he freed Percy and Frank after knocking Kate out. After Percy, Gleeson, and Frank escape from the aquarium, Keto sent Skolopendra after them.
Geras – The primordial Goddess of Old Age and the daughter of Nyx (though Geras was actually a male in Greek mythology). In "The House of Hades," Geras is among the children of Nyx that encounter Percy and Annabeth near the Mansion of Night.
Nyx – The primordial Goddess of Night who resides at the Mansion of Night in Tartarus during the day. She is said to be the oldest being in the universe besides Chaos itself, and her residence, which is close to Chaos, is "worse than Medusa's head". In The House of Hades, Percy and Annabeth accidentally wander into Nyx's territory and try to pose as tourists guided by a brochure that does not mention Nyx. Angered, Nyx shows just how important she is and summons her children, who emit pitch-black darkness that even Nyx herself cannot see through it. Before she could catch them, the couple leave through the Mansion of Night. Nyx is described by Annabeth to be "as tall as the Athena Parthenos, but very much alive."
Ourea – The Ourea are the primordial Gods of the Mountains who are the children of Gaea. In The House of Hades, there were some Ourea that make up the Apennine Mountains. When the Argo II tried to cross the Apennine Mountains, the Ourea there attacked them with boulders due to them being loyal to Gaea. They hurled boulders from their mountaintops where they severely damaged the Argo II. Leo Valdez had to turn the Argo II away from the Apennine Mountains in order to come up with a different plan.
Phorcys – A primordial Sea God and the brother of Keto. In The Mark of Athena, he and Keto run an aquarium in Georgia which contains a lot of rare sea monsters. Following a VIP tour, Phorcys traps Percy and Frank in a tank to fight each other. This attracts the attention of Gleeson Hedge, who manages to break the glass tank as they escape promising to return and free the sea creatures that Phorcys has in captivity.
Tartarus – While Tartarus is the name of a location where the Titans were imprisoned, there is a primordial god by that name as well. Through Gaea, Tartarus fathered Typhon and the Giants. In The House of Hades, the personification of Tartarus appeared in physical form where he makes a remark about Gaea's awakening. Percy and Annabeth fought Tartarus until Iapetus and Damasen sacrificed themselves so that Percy and Annabeth can get out of the Underworld.


== TitansEdit ==
The Titans are the children of Gaia and Uranus. Most of them fought against the Gods during the Titanomachy which ended with the Gods winning. Among the featured Titans are:
Kronos/Saturn – The King of the Titans and the Titan of time. Kronos is the main antagonist of the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series. He is the megalomaniacal father of Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Hera, Demeter, Hestia, Chiron and thus the grandfather of Percy, whom he attempts to recruit into the Titan army. He fights with a scythe with a six-foot-long magical blade that can harm both gods and mortals. During the series, Kronos is initially trapped in Tartarus, but he eventually escapes to the point where he can possess Luke's body. In this form, he leads the Titan army against Olympus while Typhon occupies the Olympians' attention. He is eventually defeated when Annabeth convinces Luke to destroy him. However, according to Hermes, he is not dead as Titans can't be killed anymore than gods can. His essence has been scattered to the wind and he has hopefully been scattered so thin he will never be able to form a consciousness again, let alone a body. In Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, Kronos is voiced by Robert Knepper. It should be noted that this is the first time ever that Kronos is seen in full force since the novels depict him hiding in the shadows of Tartarus, reforming in his sarcophagus, and possessing Luke.
Aigaios – Aigaios is a partner of Oceanus who assists in the Titans' war against Poseidon. In The Titan's Curse, Tyson reports that Aigaios protected the Princess Andromeda (a cruise ship carrying the Titan Army) from Poseidon.
Atlas – The general of the Titan army. He is the father of Calypso, Zoë Nightshade, and the Hesperides. Atlas was imprisoned on a mountaintop near San Francisco, forever cursed to hold up the sky. Atlas is extremely powerful, even for a Titan, and is a person of incredible physical strength, this being his ultimate power. He served as the primary antagonist in The Titan's Curse, when Kronos's forces captured Artemis and forced her to take his place. Percy helps Artemis subdue him and force him back under the sky. In The Last Olympian, Atlas was referenced by Kronos, who decides not to free him.
Hyperion – Lord of the East. Hyperion is the father of Helios and Selene, the Titans of the sun and moon, respectively. He appears in The Last Olympian, where he is clad in full golden armor and battles Percy. Grover traps Hyperion by turning him into a tree. In The House of Hades, Hyperion is seen reforming in Tartarus. He and Krios are later seen guarding the Doors of Death. Both are obliterated by Tartarus when he shows up to fight Percy and Annabeth.
Iapetus – Lord of the West. First seen in The Demigod Files, when Percy drags Iapetus into the river Lethe, erasing his memory. Rather than kill him, he renames him "Bob" and sends him to work for Hades. Nico treats Bob kindly In The House of Hades, he helps Percy and Annabeth in Tartarus.
Koios – Lord of the North. In The House of Hades, Koios is briefly seen in Tartarus. He greets Bob/Iapetus, not realizing his memory loss, inadvertently reminding him of several events in his past. Koios assumes Iapetus has returned to the side of the Titans and tells Iapetus that he plans to complete the Titans' assault on Olympus and they, not the giants, will rule the world, with Gaea's eventual acquiescence. He mentions that his daughter Leto had been mistreated by Zeus after "she bore him those fine twins" (Apollo and Artemis). Koios then hurries off to meet up with Krios and Hyperion at the Doors of Death. Percy describes Koios as having Apollo's smile and Artemis's eyes.
Krios – The Titan of stars and the constellations and Lord of the South. Percy sees Krios in a dream where he guards Atlas. He wears armor decorated with glowing stars. In The Lost Hero, Jason claims to have defeated Krios on Mount Orthys. In The House of Hades, Krios is seen with Hyperion guarding the Doors of Death. Both of them are obliterated by Tartarus when he appears to fight Percy and Annabeth.
Oceanus – The Titan of the Ocean. Oceanus is depicted as having the upper body of a muscular man with a long beard and horns and the lower body of a serpent. He did not fight the Olympians in the original Titanomachy, but in The Last Olympian, he assaults Poseidon's forces underwater. Oceanus is incredibly powerful, being the only being who can truly fight on par with Poseidon. After the defeat of Kronos, Oceanus escapes back to the depths of the ocean, but not before destroying much of Poseidon's palace.
Prometheus – The Titan of Forethought. Like Oceanus, Prometheus prefers to fight for the more powerful side. He supported the Olympians in the Titanomachy but joins the Titan army in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series because he believed that the Titans would win. Prometheus is sent to discuss a truce with Percy and Thalia during the Battle of Manhattan. He flees after Kronos's defeat, sending a list of excuses to Mount Olympus.


== GigantesEdit ==
The Gigantes are a race of giants that were made by Gaia and Tartarus to overthrow Olympus and were previously defeated by the Gods and Heracles during the Gigantomachy. Each was meant to oppose a specific god. They can only be defeated by a gods and heroes working together. They are mostly described as very tall with dragon-like legs and shaggy hair with different objects braided into it.
Porphyrion – The 40 ft. King of the Gigantes with green dragon-like legs that are described to be the same color as lima beans. He opposes Zeus/Jupiter. Awakened in The Lost Hero, Porphyrion fights Jason and his friends. Hera almost kills him, he escapes.
Alcyoneus – A 40 ft. Gigantes with rust-colored dragon-like legs whom Hazel almost resurrects during World War II. Alcyoneus eventually rises in the The Son of Neptune. He is invincible so long as he remains in his homeland which after his resurrection is Alaska. Frank, Hazel, and Arion defeat him after driving him into Canada. He opposes Hades/Pluto.
Clytius – A 20 ft. Gigantes with ash-colored dragon-like legs. He opposes Hecate. Clytius appears in The House of Hades. He guards the living side of the Doors of Death in Epirus. He is defeated by Hecate, Jason, Leo, Piper, Nico, Frank and Hazel.
Damasen – A 20 ft. peaceful Gigantes with red dragon-like legs who appears in The House of Hades and is exclusive to the series. He had been made to oppose Ares/Mars. Damasen had been exiled to Tartarus for refusing to take part in the ancient fight against the gods and Hercules. Percy and Annabeth encounter him in Tartarus when Iapetus (Bob) brings them to his lair. When the personification of Tartarus arrives near the Doors of Death, Damasen confronts him with Iapetus so that Percy and Annabeth can escape back to the living world.
Enceladus – A 30 ft. Gigantes with green dragon-like legs. Enceladus was the first Gigantes to be reawakened in the Heroes of Olympus series. He opposes Athena/Minerva. In The Lost Hero, Enceladus is killed by Jupiter and Jason as the Gigantes can only be killed by a god and a hero working together. In The House of Hades, Enceladus re-enters the world through the Doors of Death.
Ephialtes and Otis – Ephialtes and Otis are twin 12 ft. Gigantes that look somewhat more human than most of their brothers since they each have two snakes for legs (which they usually conceals under their black pants). They both oppose Dionysus/Bacchus. Ephialtes and Otis are awakened in The Mark of Athena by Gaea. Ephialtes and Otis manage to capture Nico di Angelo and were tasked by Gaia to kill all demigods of prophecy but two, whom they are to bring to her. They fight Jason and Percy who defeat them with the help of Bacchus. In The House of Hades, Ephialtes and Otis they return to the living world through the Doors of Death.
Hippolytos – The 30 ft. Messenger of the Gigantes with orange dragon-like legs. He opposes Hermes/Mercury. Hippolytos makes a minor appearance in The Blood of Olympus.
Mimas – The 25 ft. Gigantes charcoal-colored dragon-like legs. He opposes Hephaestus/Vulcan. Mimas makes a minor appearance in The Blood of Olympus.
Orion – This Orion is a 20 ft. Gigante who doesn't sport dragon-like legs who is much different from the Orion of Greek Mythology as he opposes Apollo and Artemis/Diana and is exclusive to this franchise. In The Heroes of Olympus, Orion is sent by Gaea to hunt down Nico di Angelo, Reyna Avila Ramírez-Arellano, and Coach Gleeson Hedge throughout their journey. Numerous times, he nearly catches them, but they either shadow travel away before he has the chance or are saved by allies in the Hunters of Artemis and the Amazons. Orion then murders countless amounts of Hunters and Amazons including Phoebe. However, he is beaten up by the Amazons and Hunters, but escapes with his life. When Reyna is resting with the pegasi, Orion shoots Blackjack and an exploding arrow next to them. Reyna prepares to sacrifice herself and at least kill Orion. She throws her dagger and it impales him through the heart.
Periboia – The female Princess of the Gigantes who is Porphyrion's daughter and is exclusive to the series. She opposes Aphrodite/Venus. Periboia appears in The Blood of Olympus.
Polybotes – A 30 ft. Gigantes with Komodo dragon-like legs. He opposes Poseidon/Neptune and can turn water to poison. Polybotes attempts to destroy Camp Jupiter in The Son of Neptune with an army of monsters. He is killed by Percy and Terminus. He expresses a particular desire to capture Percy and make him watch as he kills Poseidon. In The House of Hades, Polybotes returns to the living world through the Doors of Death.
Thoon – A shriveled wizened Gigantes with white dragon-like legs. He opposes the Fates. Thoon makes a minor appearance in The Blood of Olympus.


== ImmortalsEdit ==
Calypso – Calypso is the daughter of the titan Atlas who is imprisoned on the island of Ogygia for supporting her father during the first titan war. She first appears in The Battle of the Labyrinth, where she nurses Percy back to health. She falls in love with Percy and is heartbroken when he leaves. Percy asks the gods to release her at the end of The Last Olympian, but she is still residing there of The House of Hades, when Leo becomes trapped on Ogygia. She ends up falling in love with him. After Leo escapes, he swears that he will return for Calypso. At the end of The Blood of Olympus, Leo gets back to Ogygia and frees Calypso. They then soar into the unknown on the back of the mechanical dragonFestus.
Charon – Charon is the ferryman who carries the dead across the river Styx to the underworld. Percy and his friends meet him in The Lightning Thief. He also states he does not like being confused with the centaur Chiron. He likes Italian suits. In the film adaptation, Charon is played by Julian Richings.
Chiron – Chiron is a centaur with a white stallion body and a son of Kronos. He is the mentor of Percy Jackson and the activities director at Camp Half-Blood. In The Lightning Thief, he first appears, disguised as a Latin teacher at Percy's school. He uses an enchanted wheelchair to conceal his horse half. Chiron is played by Pierce Brosnan in the first film and by Anthony Head in the second film.
Eurytion – Eurytion is a son of Ares who works on Geryon's ranch. He appears in The Battle of the Labyrinth and helps Percy and Annabeth locate Hephaestus.
Fleecy – Fleecy is a cloud nymph who works at Iris's co-op. She appears in The Son of Neptune. She manages Iris-messaging after Iris begins focusing on her shop. Fleecy is described as young, with frizzy white hair and eyes that change colors from gray to white to black.
Hunters of Artemis – The Hunters of Artemis are a group of immortal virgin girls who gave up love in exchange for immortality and youthfulness. As their name implies, they are followers of Artemis in her hunts, though a lieutenant in chosen to lead them when Artemis is not around. Members are recruited both from mortals and demigods. They have a strong aversion to males and tend to regard them as disgusting and untrustworthy. However, their immortality will fade if they ever fall in love or "fall in battle". In battles, the hunters primarily use bows to attack. Zoë Nightshade serves as the group's lieutenant for over 2000 years, but after her death in The Titan's Curse, she is succeeded by Thalia Grace. In The Blood of Olympus, many members are massacred by the Gigante Orion (who is not the mythical Orion that Artemis knew) while attempting to give Reyna time to escape from Puerto Rico.
Zoë Nightshade – Zoë was the leader of the Hunters of Artemis. She appears in The Titan's Curse. She was a daughter of Atlas and the sea goddess Pleione. She crafted Riptide (Percy's magic sword) but lost it to Hercules. She was once one of the Hesperides, but she was disowned by her family for helping Hercules. In The Titan's Curse, she is killed by Atlas. In remembrance of her sacrifice, Artemis turns her into a constellation called "The Huntress."
Phoebe – Phoebe is one of the Hunters of Artemis, the best tracker among them. She is suspicious of boys. She appears in The Titan's Curse, The Lost Hero and The Blood of Olympus. In The Blood of Olympus, she is revealed to have looked about 14 and to have lived since Artemis first knew Orion. She eventually dies by the hands of Orion.
Celyn – Celyn is a hunter who appears in The Blood of Olympus. She is killed by Orion.
Naomi – Naomi is a daughter of Hecate and another hunter who captures Reyna in The Blood of Olympus. She is killed by Orion.

Lupa – Lupa is the wolf that raised Romulus and Remus. She guides the children of Roman gods to Camp Jupiter after they are left for her at the Wolf House where she trains them to become Roman soldiers. She appears in The Lost Hero and The Son of Neptune.
Rhea Silvia – Rhea Silvia is a former Vestal Virgin who mothered Romulus and Remus, the founders of Rome. She was made an immortal and wife of Tiberinus after she was given a death sentence for breaking her chastity vow. In The Mark of Athena, Rhea Silvia and Tiberinus give advice to Annabeth about the location of the Athena Parthenos. She is described as looking like Audrey Hepburn.


== DemigodsEdit ==
The following are the children of the gods:
Alabaster Torrington – Alabaster appears in the short story "Son of Magic" in The Demigod Diaries. He is the son of Hecate and half-brother of the murderous monster Lamia. Alabaster was one of the demigods who allied with Kronos in the Titan War in The Last Olympian. He was sent in exile after the Titan War after refusing to stay at Camp Half-Blood. He claims to have led his siblings to their deaths during the war against the Olympians. He has several magical powers, which he channels through spells and magic writings.
Austin – Austin is only mentioned in "The Last Olympian," where he is seen fighting alongside the his brothers and sisters of the Apollo Cabin.
Bianca di Angelo – Bianca is a twelve-year-old daughter of Hades and the older sister of Nico di Angelo. She becomes a Hunter of Artemis, whom she attempts to rescue in The Titan's Curse, alongside Percy, Grover, Thalia, and Zoë. She sacrifices herself to save the group from a mechanical prototype of Talos. For a while, this causes Nico to resent Percy, who had promised to do his best to protect Bianca. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Bianca (as a spirit) helps Nico learn to forgive Percy. Later in The Son of Neptune, she tries for rebirth on the Isle of the Blest.
Bobby – Bobby is a caregiver of Camp Jupiter's war elephant Hannibal. His Olympian parent is unknown.
Butch – Butch is the head counselor of the Iris cabin at Camp Half-Blood. He and Annabeth are the ones who bring Jason, Piper and Leo to the camp at the beginning of The Lost Hero. He is bald and muscular, with a tattoo of a rainbow on his upper arm.
Castor – Castor is a son of Dionysus and the twin brother of Pollux (both of whom are named after the Gemini). He is killed in The Battle of the Labyrinth when he was stabbed by a demigod allied with Kronos.
Cecil – Cecil is a son of Hermes. In The Blood of Olympus, he is a part of the team sent to sabotage Camp Jupiter's onagers.
Charles Beckendorf – Charles Beckendorf is the son of Hephaestus. Like his father, he is a master smith. He is described as having black hair and dark eyes. He is in a relationship with Silena Beauregard. He dies while trying to help Percy in The Last Olympian, around the age of 18.
Chris Rodriguez – The son of Hermes. He is often described as wearing a bandana around his head. Chris had joined Kronos and the Titans, but was turned insane by the ghost of Minos while on a mission in the Labyrinth. Clarisse finds him and brings him to Camp Half-Blood, where Dionysus restores his sanity. Chris later has a relationship with Clarisse. In the film adaptation, Chris is played by Grey Damon.
Clovis – Clovis is the lead counselor of the Hypnos cabin. In The Lost Hero, Annabeth consults him regarding Jason's memory loss. In "The Blood of Olympus", Nico Di Angelo sends a dream message to him to contact Thalia Grace.
Connor Stoll – Connor and his brother Travis serve as lead counselors of the Hermes cabin after Luke's departure. The Stolls are known to be crafty and mischievous, like their father. They are tall and thin, with stringy brown hair. Both survive the Titan war.
Dakota – A son of Bacchus at Camp Jupiter, Dakota has an addiction to extra-sugary Kool-Aid. He is both a centurion of the Fifth Cohort and a senator. Dakota is often on a sugar high, especially when stressed; in moments of clarity, however, he proves himself a capable leader.
Drew Tanaka – Drew is the lead counselor of the Aphrodite cabin, succeeding Silena, in The Lost Hero. She bullies and controls her cabin members with her power of charmspeak, leading Piper to successfully challenge her for the lead counselor position. She is also mentioned in The Serpent's Shadow of the Kane Chronicles as someone Sadie hates.
Ethan Nakamura – A son of Nemesis, Ethan fights with Kronos and the Titans, but begins to rethink his position. In The Last Olympian, he learns Percy's Achilles weak spot, but instead of killing him, Ethan turns on Kronos. However, his attack fails and Kronos kills him. Before he falls to his death 500 feet from Olympus, Ethan tells Percy that none of the bad blood that led to the war would have been caused if the minor gods had thrones on Olympus.
Gwendolyn – A centurion of the Fifth Cohort at Camp Jupiter. Gwendolyn is killed in The Son of Neptune but comes back to life because of Thanatos's capture. Her return prompts Mars to appear at Camp Jupiter and explain the circumstances of Thanatos's absence. She retires as centurion the day after and is replaced by Frank Zhang.
Jacob – Jacob is the legion Aquilifer (which is an eagle bearer) of Camp Jupiter. His godly parent is unknown.
Jake Mason – Jake becomes the head of the Hephaestus cabin after the death of Beckendorf in The Last Olympian. He is severely injured during the Hepheastus's cabin's attempt to tame the bronze dragon later named Festus. In The Lost Hero, he steps down and gives the lead counselor position to Leo, after Leo finds Hephaestus's bunker in the woods.
Jason – Not to be confused with Jason Grace or the mythical Jason, he is a demigod briefly mentioned in "The Titan's Curse", being instructed by Thalia to team with Silena Beauregard and Laurel during capture the flag. His godly parent is unknown.
Katie Gardner – Katie is the head counselor for Demeter's cabin at Camp Half-Blood. She survives the war with the Titans. Katie strongly dislikes the Stoll brothers, who once put chocolate Easter bunnies on the Demeter cabin's grass roof.
Kayla – Kayla is only seen or mentioned in The Last Olympian, where she was seen carrying orders by Michael Yew. Her Olympian parentage is unknown, though because of the circumstances around her she is likely a daughter of Apollo.
Lacy – Lacy is a daughter of Aphrodite who befriends Piper in The Lost Hero. She also appears in The Kane Chronicles. Lacy and Drew Tanaka appear in the Kane Chronicles, where Lacy is familiar with main character Sadie Kane.
Larry – A senator at Camp Jupiter and a member of either the First or Second Cohort.
Laurel – Laurel is only mentioned in The Titan's Curse. Because of circumstances around her mention, she may be a daughter of Aphrodite.
Lee Fletcher – Lee was the head of Apollo cabin. He leads a team to attack a dragon threatening the camp. He is killed by a giant in The Battle of the Labyrinth.
Leila – Leila is a daughter of Ceres and a centurion of the Fourth Cohort. In The Blood of Olympus, she and the rest of her cohort defect to Reyna's side once the latter arrives at Long Island.
Lou Ellen – Lou Ellen is a daughter of Hecate in The Lost Hero. She is known for playing magical tricks on fellow campers.
Malcolm – Malcolm is the assistant counselor of the Athena cabin, under Annabeth.
Michael Kahale – Michael Kahale is a son of Venus and a centurion of the First Cohort. He is described as a fearsome Hawaiian despite being the son of a love goddess. In The Blood of Olympus, he reluctantly follows Octavian's order to attack Camp Half-Blood, but later leaves him to his fate when the latter ignites an onager with his feet being tangled with it.
Michael Varus – Michael Varus was a son of Janus and a former praetor of Camp Jupiter in the 1970s. He was killed by Alcyoneus during an expedition in Alaska and the eagle of Camp Jupiter was stolen with him. This tarnished the reputation of Varus' cohort, the Fifth, which was not recovered until Jason's promotion to praetor over three decades later. Varus' ghost appears to attack Percy in The Son of Neptune and again in The Blood of Olympus where he confronts Jason with his mother's mania and then mortally wounds him with an imperial gold sword.
Michael Yew – Michael Yew succeeds Lee Fletcher as head of the Apollo cabin. He is described as very short, with a face that reminds Percy of a ferret. In The Demigod Files, in an interview with Clarisse, she mentions that she would want to pulverize Michael, thus stating that they are enemies. He is an excellent archer like most of Apollo's children, and uses sonic arrows which were given to him by his father. He was presumed killed after leading a group of demigods in the fight against Kronos's army; Percy found his bow, but not his body.
Miranda Gardiner – Miranda is second in command of the Demeter cabin in The Lost Hero. She assumes the head counselor's duties in the winter when Katie Gardner hibernates.
Mitchell – Mitchell is a son of Aphrodite who is kid to Piper in The Lost Hero.
Nyssa – Nyssa is a daughter of Hephaestus. She meets Leo in The Lost Hero. She is mentioned on several occasions in the beginning and end of The Lost Hero.
Pollux – Pollux is a son of Dionysus and the twin brother of Castor (both of whom are named after the Gemini). He survives the war against the Titans, though his brother dies in The Battle of the Labyrinth.
Silena Beauregard – Silena was the head of the Aphrodite cabin for most of the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series. She is kind to Percy and befriends Clarisse LaRue after giving the other girl advice about her first relationship. She served as a spy for Kronos within Camp Half-Blood, but wanted to quit when her actions led to the death of her boyfriend Charles Beckendorf. Luke blackmails her into continuing as a spy. In The Last Olympian, she redeems herself by disguising herself as Clarisse and leading the Ares cabin into battle against the Titans. She dies a hero's death and is given a funeral at camp.
Will Solace – Will is the head of the Apollo cabin in the Heroes of Olympus series. In The Last Olympian, he uses his father's healing gift to help Annabeth Chase. In The Blood of Olympus, Will is revealed to possess the ability to produce sonic waves while trying to distract the Romans from checking their onagers. At the end of the series, it is implied that he begins a relationship with Nico di Angelo.
Travis Stoll – Travis and his brother Connor serve as lead counselor of the Hermes cabin after Luke's departure. The Stolls are known to be crafty and mischievous, like their father. They survive the Titan war.


=== Historical charactersEdit ===
In this franchise, different historic people are mentioned to have Greek Gods as their parents, or are otherwise involved with the series. Among the known historical demigods are:
Adolf Hitler – Adolf Hitler is a son of Hades and the chancellor of Nazi Germany. He is mentioned as one of the demigods of the Big Three who caused World War II, which resulted in the Pact of the Big Three.
Alfred Hitchcock – Alfred Hitchcock is the son of an unknown god. Alfred is mentioned when Percy Jackson and Will Solace arrive at the Plaza Hotel. It says that the Plaza attracted a lot of famous demigods over the years, such as the Beatles and Alfred Hitchcock.
Amelia Earhart – Amelia Earhart is the daughter of an unknown god. In The Sea of Monsters, Annabeth Chase mentions Amelia when talking to Circe. She was among the list of great female heroes. In "The Lost Hero," Aeolus mentions that he knocked Amelia Earhart out of the sky and that the gods still pester him about it while talking to Jason Grace, Piper McLean, and Leo Valdez in his fortress.
Archimedes – Archimedes is the son of Hephaestus. He is credited with the creation of many modern machines and an accurate approximation of pi. He is in modern times considered as one of the most well-known and one of the greatest of Hephaestus' children. It is the wish among many of Archimedes' modern-day siblings to find the lost works of Archimedes. During the Second Punic War, Archimedes was killed by a Roman guard working for General Marcus Claudius Marcellus who had given specific orders not to harm Archimedes. While searching for Nico di Angelo with Frank Zhang and Hazel Levesque in Rome as seen in The Mark of Athena, Leo Valdez recovered the lost works of Archimedes. He uses them to destroy the eidolons, possessive spirits working for Gaea. He planned to take them to Bunker 9 at Camp Half-Blood to study them further. With Archimedes' works, Leo hoped to save Camp Half-Blood from the Roman forces from Camp Jupiter.
Blackbeard – Edward "Blackbeard" Teach is the son of Ares. He was a notorious English pirate who operated around the West Indies and the Eastern coast of the American Colonies during the early 18th century. Instead of dying in his famous last stand, his ship landed on Circe's island where he and his crew were turned into guinea pigs for several hundred years. In The Sea of Monsters, Edward Teach is seen in guinea pig form. While on a quest, Annabeth Chase used Hermes' multivitamins to turn all of the guinea pigs, among them Percy and Edward, back into humans. Along with his crew, he began to chase after Circe while Percy and Annabeth escaped with their pirate ship, the Queen Anne's Revenge. He was last seen on Circe's island yelling at Percy Jackson and Annabeth for stealing his ship.
Franklin D. Roosevelt – Franklin D. Roosevelt is the son of Zeus and former President of the United States. He was mentioned by Bianca di Angelo in The Titan's Curse when she was trying to name the previous president due to her long period of time in the Lotus Casino.
Frederic Bartholdi – Frederic Bartholdi is the son of Athena who designed the Statue of Liberty. In The Demigod Files story titled The Stolen Chariot, Percy Jackson mentions Frederic Bartholdi to Clarisse La Rue. According to what Annabeth Chase had told Percy, Bartholdi designed the Statue of Liberty as a representation of his mother Athena.
George Washington – George Washington is the son of Athena who is the 1st President of the United States. In The Lightning Thief, George Washington is mentioned in the book as one of the few famous and successful demigods who survived outside of Camp Half-Blood and is depicted in one of the works displays during the Camp Half-Blood fireworks.
Harriet Tubman – Harriet Tubman is a daughter of Hermes and abolitionist spy. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Chiron states that Harriet once used many clear-sighted mortals on the Underground Railroad hinting that the Underground Railroad may have utilized the Labyrinth to help transport escaped slaves.
Harry Houdini – Harry Houdini is the son of an unknown god who is a famous magician and escape artist. It is mentioned in The Lightning Thief that he, Orpheus, and Hercules have each been able to escape from the Underworld. A Nereid said that Houdini "could escape even the depths of Tartarus."
Jack London – Jack London is the son of Mercury and author of Call of the Wild. He was mentioned in The Lost Hero as the one who built the Wolf House where Lupa judges the newly arrived demigods to see if they are worthy of being trained at Camp Jupiter.
Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain – Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain is the son of an unknown god and a soldier in the American Civil War. In The Sea of Monsters, Chamberlain is mentioned by Chiron when talking to Percy Jackson after having rescued him and his friends from the Princess Andromeda.
Thomas Jefferson – Thomas Jefferson is the 3rd President of the United States and the writer of the Declaration of Independence. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Thomas Jefferson is mentioned to be among the rotating members of the Judgement Pavilion where he is assigned to judge where Daedalus will be sent to after his death.
William H. Seward – William H. Seward is the son of Hebe and a former Governor of New York. During the Battle of Manhattan in The Last Olympian, Annabeth Chase activated a statue of William H. Seward in Madison Square Park. It was the first statue she activated. It was a celestial bronze statue on a red marble pedestal. The William Seward statue was sitting on a chair, legs crossed, wearing an old-fashioned suit (similar to Abraham Lincoln's suit) and a bow tie and long coattails. Books were piled under his chair, and he held a writing quill in one hand, big metal sheet of parchment in the other. The statue was one of many that Daedalus had created, to either attack or defend the Olympian gods, depending on which he needed to do to survive. He continued waking the other automatons as he was instructed to do.
William Shakespeare – William Shakespeare is the son of Apollo. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, William Shakespeare is one of the rotating members of the Judgement Pavilion.
William Tecumseh Sherman – William Tecumseh Sherman is a son of Ares who fought in the American Civil War. In The Mark of Athena, William Sherman was mentioned by Coach Hedge when he and the seven arrived in Atlanta calling him Frank Zhang's half-brother and mistaking the son of Mars as Greek.
Winston Churchill – Winston Churchill is the son of Poseidon who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom


=== LegaciesEdit ===
The following are mentioned not as direct children of the Olympians, but as grandchildren, great-grandchildren, or the like:
Bryce Lawrence – A legacy of Orcus. In The Blood of Olympus, Bryce is seen by Nico di Angelo in a dream. Despite being banished from Camp Jupiter by Reyna years ago for having killed his own centurion, Octavian allows him to return turning a blind eye to his cruelty towards the rest of his fellow cohort when he first joined the legion. He is given his probatio necklace and is assigned to the Fifth Cohort. In South Carolina, Bryce overhears Reyna's story of killing her father, and tries to capture her and take her to Octavian to charge her with the crime of patricide. He then is turned into a ghost by Nico and forced into the Underworld.
Emily Zhang – Emily is Frank's mother, a Canadian Forces soldier who died in Afghanistan. She is descended from Pylos, which imbues her with the ability to shapeshift. After her death, her mother raises Frank. She only appears in flashbacks.
Julia – A little girl who is the descendant of an unspecified god. In The Son of Neptune, she works as Terminus' helper at the security checkpoints at the New Rome town line. She often hides playfully underneath Terminus' statue base.
Octavian – Octavian is ambitious and cunning. He describes himself a descendant of Apollo in The Son of Neptune but Rachel calls him "son of Apollo" in The Mark of Athena. He reads the auguries for Camp Jupiter. After Jason Grace disappears, he campaigns to succeed to Jason's position as praetor. He is suspicious of the amnesic Percy Jackson when he arrives at Camp Jupiter, deducing he is a Greek demigod, rather than Roman. Mocking him and attempting to undermine his quest. When demigods from Camp Half-Blood arrive at Camp Jupiter, Octavian declares the Greeks invaders and urges the Romans to fight them off, believing the Greeks to be in league with Gaea. His warmongering escalates further in The House of Hades where he violates direct orders from Reyna not to attack Camp Half-Blood after leave him in command of the Legion. He is thin and blonde. He is also said to "look eighteen but could probably pass as younger." He dies in The Blood of Olympus where he launches an onager attack on Gaea during her defeat. His foot gets tangled in the launching rope and he is launched along with the paylod and dies in the explosion. As his effort may have helped defeat Gaea, Octavian is hailed as a hero and his true actions covered up.


== Mythological charactersEdit ==
The following characters from Greek mythology appear in this series:
Achilles – The ghost of Achilles appears briefly in The Last Olympian, warning Percy about the Curse of Achilles.
Amazons – The Amazons are a tribe of female warriors who usually worshiped goddesses like Hera and Artemis. Some Amazons appear in The Son of Neptune where they are sent to their compound at Reyna's request. They also run the billion-dollar Amazon.com, which they use as a source of cover and revenue. Though they are often confused with the Hunters of Artemis, the Amazons are not misandrists and like men just fine; they are just a very matriarchal society in which their male spouses are made to work in manual labor while the Amazons work as administrators.
Hylla – Reyna's sister and the current Queen of the Amazons.
Kinzie – An Amazon who is the daughter of a nymph and is close and loyal to Hylla. She disarmed Percy and sent Frank flying across the room in "The Son of Neptune." Kinzie also cornered Percy during the Feast of Fortuna and asked out Percy, who declined. In The Blood of Olympus, Kinzie is killed by Orion.
Lulu – An Amazon guard who is loyal to Otrera. In The Son of Neptune, Lulu guarded Percy Jackson and Frank Zhang.
Otrera – A daughter of Ares and the first Queen of the Amazons (who was originally killed by Bellerophon). In The Son of Neptune, she is revealed to be among those who emerged from the Doors of Death. She challenged Hylla for the title of Queen of the Amazons. When she planned to defeat Hylla, Otrera plans to have the Amazons help Gaea and the Giants destroy Camp Jupiter. Hylla manages to defeat Otrera twice until Thanatos is freed from the chains where he was trapped, making sure she would not rise from the dead and challenge her again.

Arachne – Arachne was once a female weaver who was turned into a spider by Athena after she won in a weaving contest against Arachne. In The Mark of Athena, Arachne appears as a spider-like monster who is the last obstacle for Annabeth's quest to the Athena Parthenos and is in collaboration with Otus and Ephialtes. Annabeth challenges Arachne to a weaving contest where Annabeth tricks Arachne into making monster-sized Chinese handcuffs which Annabeth places onto Arachne. When Annabeth states to Arachne that the Athena Parthenos will restore Mount Olympus, Arachne goes into a fit and brings down her chamber enough to open a chasm to Tartarus. As Arachne falls down into Tartarus, she manages to ensnare Annabeth at the last minute as she and Percy go down the chasm with Nico promising to meet them at the Doors of Death. In The House of Hades, Arachne ambushes Percy and Annabeth which ended with Percy using Riptide to defeat Arachne.
Boreads – The Boreads are the sons of Boreas and the brothers of Khione. Calais is depicted as a big simpleton who struggles with words that have more than two syllables while Zetes is shown to be hetrosexual and to maintain an eighties hairstyle. In The Lost Hero, the Boreads are seen with Boreas. In The House of Hades, Khione and the Boreads attack the Argo II. The three of them are defeated when Piper McLean charmspeaks Festus to life.
Cercopes – Passalos and Akmon are two brothers who are the children of Oceanus and Theia. They worked as thieves until they were caught by Hercules and later turned into monkeys by Zeus. In The House of Hades, the Cercopes have set up shop in Balogna, Italy. When the Argo II docks there, the Cercopes attacked the ship and robbed it, taking things like an Archimedes Sphere and Piper McLean's dagger Katoptris. Leo Valdez and Jason At the Fountain of Neptune, they incapacitated Jason by trapping him in a net. Leo chases them to their hide-out and defeats them with a home-made flash-bang grenade. He then got their possessions back and agreed not to kill Passalos and Akmon on the condition that they go to America and disrupt the Romans in order to slow down their attack on Camp Half-Blood. Later in a dream, it is shown that they are being very successful in this goal.
Chrysaor – Chrysaor is a half-giant who is the son of Medusa and Poseidon, the brother of Pegasus, and the father of Geryon. He is first mentioned in The Last Olympian when Percy and Annabeth go to see the Oracle of Delphi in the attic of the Big House. A pair of fuzzy dice is said to have been stolen from his car. In The Mark of Athena, Chrysaor and his crew attacked the Argo II in the Mediterranean Sea with the intent to sell Piper and Hazel to Circe, kill Jason, and then give Annabeth and Percy to Gaia. Chrysaor battles Percy on the deck of the Argo II. Once Chrysaor's crew abandon him, Percy surround him. Chrysaor is knocked off the Argo II by Frank and Percy and falls into the sea.
Circe – Circe ran a magical beauty boutique in the Sea of Monsters, where she went by the alias of C.C. While she treated females at her spa, she turned males into guinea pigs. When Percy was turned into a guinea pig, Annabeth used multivitamins from Hermes to restore him, and together they defeated Circe. In The Heroes of Olympus series, it is revealed that Circe employed Reyna and Hylla after they left Puerto Rico and treated them nicely, at least until the pirates were freed and proceeded to capture the sisters.
Daedalus – Architect of the Labyrinth, Daedalus is the son of Athena and the father of Icarus. He killed his nephew Perdix but escaped eternal punishment by casting his soul into automatons. Athena branded him with a murderer's brand. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Daedalus appears under the alias of a Camp Half-Blood worker named Quintus (meaning 'the fifth' in Latin). Percy and Annabeth convince him to use his technical genius to help defeat the Titan army in the Labyrinth. He then accepts death, willing to Annabeth his laptop filled with thousands of years of notes and ideas. In death, he becomes the Underworld's architect and is allowed to visit Icarus and Perdix on weekends.
Echo – An Oread who loved her voice. Zeus fell in love with Echo causing Hera to curse Echo into repeating everything she says. She did have an encounter with Narcissus at the time when he was admiring his reflection in the water. When Echo evaded the love advances of Pan, she was killed by some panicked shepherds and her fragments were scattered by Gaea. In The Mark of Athena, Leo Valdez and Hazel Levesque encounter Echo on a small island where they were looking for lime and Celestial Bronze that was needed to repair the damaged Argo II. Echo helps Leo get the Celestial Bronze from the lake as Leo makes insults towards Narcissus which Echo repeats.
The Fates – The three women who are the personification of destiny and are controllers of the threads of life. In The Lightning Thief, Percy and Grover encounter them at an old-fashioned fruit stand. In The Last Olympian, the Fates take Luke's dead body away after the Second Olympian War. In The Blood of Olympus, the Fates are seen fighting their old enemy Thoon and killing him the same way they did back in the Gigantomachy.
Clotho – The Fate who spins the Thread of Life from her distaff onto her spindle.
Lachesis – The Fate who measures the Thread of Life with her rod.
Atropos – The Fate who cuts the Thread of Life and chooses the manner of the person's death.

Irus – Irus is a beggar who ran afoul of Odysseus upon his return to Ithica. In The Blood of Olympus, Jason posed as Irus to get close to the ghosts of the Suitors of Penelope.
King Lycaon – Lycaon was a king who was turned into a wolf after attempting to test Zeus's omniscience. In The Lost Hero, Lycaon encounters Jason, Leo, and Piper in their search for Aeolus. He and his werewolves attempt to kidnap Jason and kill Leo and Piper at Gaia's command. The Hunters of Artemis thwart the plan, but Lycaon escapes.
King Midas – King Midas was a king who possessed the golden touch which turned anything he touched to gold. He is among the people brought back to life by Gaia in The Lost Hero where his Golden Touch was restored upon him and his son Lityerses emerging from the Doors of Death. It has been mentioned that Midas has occasionally turned Lityerses to gold by mistake causing him to use the nearby lake to wash the gold off him. Jason, Piper, and Leo come to Midas's mansion in Omaha, Nebraska. He was initially polite before revealing his allegiance and turning Leo and Piper into solid gold. Jason fought back against Midas and Lityerses and managed to restore Leo and Piper to life.
King Minos – King Minos is a former king who becomes one of the judges of the Underworld. Nico consults him in The Battle of the Labyrinth, but Minos kidnaps Nico and tries to kill Daedalus, who constructed the Labyrinth for him. When Daedalus later ends up in the Underworld, Minos unsuccessfully tries to convince the other two judges to punish Daedalus.
King Sisyphus – A former ruler of Corinth. He had committed violations of guest hospitality, seduced his niece, plotted to kill his brother Salmoneus, and told the River God Asopus where Zeus had his daughter. His major crimes involved cheating death twice. The first where he tricked Thanatos into showing him how the chains worked causing Thanatos to be trapped until Ares freed him (Thanatos being trapped displeased Ares since no one in battle could die). The second time was when he complained to Persephone that his wife Merope did not give him a proper funeral and sent Sisyphus' spirit to the living. Even when Sisyphus did not want to return to the Underworld, he was forcefully dragged back there by Hermes. His punishment in The Fields of Punishment was to push a boulder up a hill. When it got close to the top, the boulder would roll back to the bottom and Sisyphus was condemned to begin again. He appears in The Demigod Files in the story titled The Sword of Hades when Percy and Nico ask him advice while Thalia pushes the boulder up the hill. He does not really help them much, but he does say that he helped someone else. He said that he told that other person to go see Melinoe. Therefore, Percy and his friends go to see Melinoe as Sisyphus begs for them to set him free from his punishment for being here was a minor set-back.
King Tantalus – Tantalus is the spirit of a king from the Fields of Punishment who is the son of Zeus. He ended up there after killing his son Pelops, cutting him up, and serving him as food to the Gods. His punishment in the Fields of Punishment was to stand under a fruit tree in the middle of a lake. When he tried to pluck the fruit to eat, the branches of the tree rose out of his reach and when he bent down to drink the water, the level would retreat. Tantalus became "tantalised" by having food and drink close to him, but unable to enjoy either. He becomes the activities director at Camp Half-Blood after Chiron is fired. He appears in The Sea of Monsters as a minor character. Even when hired as the activities director, he could not eat or drink as the food kept evading him. Tantalus is shown to hate Percy and his friends even more than he hates most half-bloods, yet shows favoritism to Clarisse, as when naming her hero when the camp was attacked by Colchis Bulls or when she wins the chariot race and throwing a banquet in her honor. When Tyson is brought to camp, Tantalus insults and makes fun of him even when Tyson is claimed by Poseidon. When the camp is attacked by a large flock of Stymphalian birds, Tantalus blames it on Percy, Annabeth, and Tyson's "bad chariot driving" despite that they were the ones who defeated the birds. At the end of the book, his curse is lifted by Dionysus just before he is sent back to the Underworld as he attempts to take some food along. Though none of the campers are sad to see him go.
Medea – Medea is a sorceress and a granddaughter of Helios. Jason, Piper, and Leo encounter her in The Lost Hero, where she runs a mall in Chicago. She becomes enraged, however upon learning Jason's name which he shares her husband, a hero who left her. Her magic causes Jason and Leo to become hostile to one another. Realizing Medea is an agent of Gaea, Piper brings them to their senses and leads their escape before Medea can do anything else to them.
Narcissus – Narcissus was a hunter who was renowned for his beauty and disdained those that had loved him. Nemesis puts a spell on him that causes him to fall in love with the reflection of himself in the water where he dies upon not being able to leave his own reflection. In The Mark of Athena, Narcissus is encountered by Hazel Levesque and Leo Valdez at the Salt Lake in Utah where the demigods are looking for the Celestial Bronze which is needed to help repair the damaged Argo II. When Narcissus realizes that Hazel and Leo have managed to steal his bronze plate which he uses to be able to admire his own reflection, he and a mob of nymphs runs after them trying to kill them.
Oracle of Delphi – Apollo's Oracle of Delphi resides in the mummified remains of its host, until its power was transferred to Rachel Dare in The Last Olympian. At the end of World War II, the oracle issued the Great Prophecy, saying a child of the Big Three (Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades) would determine the preservation or destruction of Olympus. This caused those gods to form a pact not to father more demigods. In Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, the Oracle of Delphi is voiced by Shohreh Aghdashloo.
Pasiphaë – A Greek sorceress and a daughter of Helios who appears in The House of Hades. She is resentful of the gods for punishing her by giving birth to Minotaur, while her husband, Minos, who caused the problem in the first place, enjoys the right as a judge in the Underworld for being Zeus' son. She is allied with the giants and does a battle of sorcery with Hazel, who manages to trick her into entering an imaginary trapdoor in the Labyrinth.
Phineus – A blind seer who appears in The Son of Neptune. Percy Jackson finds him in Portland where the Harpies are trying to steal his food. Before he dies from Gaia making him choose a poisoned cup, he reveals to Percy the location of Alcyoneus' camp.
Procrustes – Procrustes is the son of Poseidon who is depicted as a half-giant in this franchise. He is a rogue thief and blacksmith who was previously defeated by Theseus. Procrustes appears in The Lightning Thief as "Crusty," a Los Angeles mattress store owner. He traps Annabeth and Grover on his beds and tries to stretch their spine. Percy defeats him by using Riptide on him.
Sciron – Scrion is a thief who is the son of Poseidon. He had previously fought Theseus in the past. In The House of Hades, Sciron and his Giant Sea Turtle waylaid the Argo II on the coast of Croatia. Like his fight with Theseus, Hazel defeated Sciron by pushing him off the cliff where he was gobbled by the Giant Sea Turtle.
Suitors of Penelope – The Suitors of Penelope were men who competed to become the next wife to Penelope when they believed that she became a widow when Odysseus was fighting in the Trojan War. When Odysseus returned, his disguised appearance spoke to Penelope to hold a contest where the Suitor that can string Odysseus' bow will become her new wife. When Odysseus won the contest, he sheds his disguise and kills the Suitors with the help of Telemachus and Philoeteus. In The Blood of Olympus, Jason, Piper, and Annabeth encounter the ghosts of the Suitors of Penelope on Ithica where they are now allied with Gaea.
Antinous – One of the Suitors of Penelope.
Eurymachus – One of the Suitors of Penelope.

Theseus – A hero who is the son of Poseidon. When Nico was trying to summon Bianca in The Battle of the Labyrinth, he ended up summoning the spirit of Theseus.


== Creatures and monstersEdit ==

Agrius and Oreius – Agrius and Oreius are humanoid bears that were a result of a union between a woman named Polyphonte and a bear due to the power of Aphrodite. They were also the great-grandsons of Ares due to Polyphonte being Ares' granddaughter. The two served as Luke's henchmen in The Sea of Monsters.
Antaeus – Antaeus is a half-giant who is the son of Poseidon and Gaea. He was invincible as long as he maintained contact with the ground, so Percy defeated him by hanging him in the air with chains.
Apollo's Cattle – The sacred cattle herd of Apollo. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, Apollo's Cattle were seen at the Triple G Ranch under Geryon's care since Apollo never has time to take care of them. Apollo was unaware that he was using some of the cattle for meat and feeding them to the monsters that work for Kronos.
Arai – The Arai is a race of winged female daemons who inhabit Tartarus. They are similar to the Furies, but their number is not limited to three, and they are under control of their mother, Nyx, instead of Hades. The spirits carry the grudge of anyone whom their killer have wronged; when Percy kills some of them, they release the grudges of Kampê's death by crushing and Calypso's isolation in Ogygia.
Argus – Argus is a humanoid figure with eyes all over his body who works as a security guard at Camp Half-Blood. He rarely speaks as he is said to have an eye on his tongue. He cares for Hera a lot because she is his mother.
Arion – Arion is a horse born to Neptune and Ceres, making him Percy's half-brother. He appears in The Son of Neptune where Hazel frees him from the Amazons. He is described as having a tan coat with a black mane and tail. He is a free spirit and seems to have a bad temper, being known to curse when his abilities are challenged.
Aurae – The Aurae are wind spirits who work at Camp Jupiter as seen in The Son of Neptune.
Mellie – An Aurae. She is the personal assistant of Aeolus as seen in "The Lost Hero." At the end of The Lost Hero she works as Piper's dad's assistant, Tristan McLean.

Automaton – Automatons are similar to highly developed robots with intricate circuitry that makes them hard to fix. Most are made out of steel, but some like Festus the dragon are made out of celestial bronze or other materials. In the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series, Annabeth discovers that many statues in Manhattan are actually automatons created by Daedalus, an army that could either defend or attack Olympus.
Argentium – Reyna's silver Automaton Hound who appears in The Son of Neptune, The Mark of Athena and The House of Hades.
Aurum – Reyna's gold Automaton Hound who appears in The Son of Neptune, The Mark of Athena and The House of Hades.
Bronze Dragon – An automaton dragon made of bronze created by the campers in Hephaestus' cabin to help defend Camp Half-Blood. He is first shown in "Percy Jackson and the Bronze Dragon" story of "The Demigod Files" where Percy, Annabeth, and Silena reactivate it in order to save Charles Beckendorf from the Myrmekes. He was deactivated by Beckendorf with Percy's help afterwards, due to the fact that it was unstable and dangerous. It is fixed by the Hephaestus cabin to protect the camp sometime after this. He is later named "Festus" by Leo Valdez in "The Lost Hero" when Leo found him hidden in the forest. Leo manages to forge some wings onto Festus. Although Festus was sliced to bits by the lasers on King Midas' mansion, Festus' head was recovered by Hephaestus who had his cabin build the Argo II with Festus' head as the ship's figurehead. Festus means "happy" in Latin.
Celedon - The Celedons are automatons forged by Hephaestus to serve as Apollo's backup singers. In Percy Jackson and the Singer of Apollo, Percy Jackson had to find the fourth Celedon for Apollo after it left Mount Olympus and fled into Times Square.
Mechanical Spiders - A bunch of automaton spiders that were created by Hephaestus.

Basilisk – Basilisks are small green snakes with colorful spikes and poisonous bites and they can breathe fire. In The Son of Neptune, they attacked Camp Jupiter, but Frank shapeshifts into a mongoose (or weasel) and scares them off.
Cacus – Cacus is a fire-breathing giant. In The Demigod Diaries story titled "Percy Jackson and the Staff of Hermes," Cacus had stolen Hermes' Caduceus. He later attacked Percy Jackson and Annabeth Chase. Annabeth hit Cacus with her metal claw and Percy killed Cacus with Hermes' Caduceus.
Centaur – Centaurs are half-man, half-horse creatures, often depicted as wild and drunk. Chiron is the only truly civilized centaur. Many of his kin are part of the Party Ponies. There are other centaurs who work for Gaea's army.
Party Ponies – They are Chiron's kin. As their name suggests, they are a vast clan-like extended family of rowdy centaurs who reside in the United States with chapters hailing from each respective state. They are key players in two major incidents in the series. In The Sea of Monsters, they go along with Chiron and rescue Percy from Luke during their duel on the Princess Andromeda. In The Last Olympian, they help Chiron and the others fight the major battle between the gods and the Titans.Larry – Member of the Party Ponies.
Owen – Member of the Party Ponies.

Cerberus – The three-headed dog who guards the entrance to the Underworld. In The Lightning Thief, he befriends Annabeth. He also appears in The Last Olympian when he is playing with Mrs. O'Leary. Cereberus is the son of Echidna and Typhon.
Charybdis – One of the two monsters (the other being Scylla) who live on either side of a narrow channel of water (the entrance to the Sea of Monsters). She takes the form of a giant mouth that swallows and releases water, creating whirlpools. she is described by Percy as an "orthodontist's nightmare".
Chimera – A three-headed beast that is part lion, part goat, and has a snake-headed tail. It is first seen in the form of a Chihuahua. It confronted Percy atop the St. Louis Arch alongside its mother, Echidna. Overwhelmed by the creature and poisoned by its snake head, Percy was forced to jump into the water far below to escape it. It disappeared after Percy dove into the water.
Clazmonian Sow – A flying pig that appeared directly after Hyperion was defeated. Percy defeats it with the help of Blackjack, a statue of Hermes, and the New York Public Library's two stone lion statues (that were really automatons).
Cloud Nymph – Nymphs associated with the clouds.
Fleecy – A Cloud Nymph who appeared in The Son of Neptune where she works at R.O.F.L.

Colchis Bull – The Colchis Bulls are elephant-sized, fire-breathing bronze bulls created by Hephaestus with horns of silver and rubies for eyes. In The Sea of Monsters, some of these bulls attack Camp Half-Blood and are defeated by Tyson. They were later used to make the tracks for the Chariot Race.
Cyclops – A race of one eyed-giants who have three species as mentioned in "The Lost Hero". The first group of Cyclopes are the Elder Cyclops who are friendly and help the gods ever since the Titanomachy. The second group of Cyclopes are the ones who are the children of Poseidon. Tyson is one of these. The third group of Cyclopes is the southern group who raise goats and live in caves. The fourth group of Cyclopes is the northern group who helped the Titans make weapons and are smarter than the southern group of Cyclopes. In The Last Olympian, some rogue Cyclopes were seen fighting with Kronos' army in "The Battle of Manhattan."
Ma Gasket – A female cyclops of the Northern Cyclops faction who is the mother of Sump and Torque. She appears in "The Lost Hero" when Jason, Piper, and Leo visit her factory. In "The Son of Neptune," Ma Gasket leads the Cyclopes in an attack on Camp Jupiter where she is defeated by Tyson.
Polyphemus – A cyclops of the Southern Faction. Percy Jackson and his friends encounter him on an island in "The Sea of Monsters." He is shown to be blind and there was also a reference about Odysseus being responsible for blinding him under the alias of "Nobody". When Polyphemus tries to pray to Poseidon to get revenge on Percy for hurting him, Percy states that Poseidon is also his father. He later tried to eat them only for them to escape. In Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, Polyphemus is portrayed by Robert Maillet and voiced by Ron Perlman.
Sump – The son of Ma Gasket who appears in "The Lost Hero".
Torque – The son of Ma Gasket who appears in "The Lost Hero."

Draco Aionius – Some of these monsters attacked Camp Half-Blood while Percy Jackson was on his adventures in the "The Sea of Monsters".
Drakon – A race of giant serpent-like creatures that are several millennia older than dragons. They come in three different types: Aethiopian, Lydian, and Maeonian. In The Demigod Diaries story titled "Leo Valdez and the Quest for Buford," an unidentified Drakon appeared in the Camp Half-Blood Forest until it was ripped apart by the Maenads.
Aethiopian Drakon – One was being raised by Luke in The Sea of Monsters. When one of the Bear Twins seemed reluctant to do his bidding, Luke threatened to feed him to the Drakon. In The Battle of the Labyrinth, an Aethiopian Drakon was seen in the cargo bay of the Princess Andromeda.
Lydian Drakon – The oldest and fiercest of the Drakons. In The Last Olympian, Kronos unleashed it upon Manhattan where it killed many half-bloods before being killed by Clarisse La Rue.
Maeonian Drakon – In The House of Hades, the Maeonian Drakon attacked Percy, Annabeth, and Bob and was killed by Damasen.

Dryad – Dryads are a species of nymphs that are associated with trees and forests.
Juniper – Juniper is a Dryad. She is Grover Underwood's girlfriend. In "The Battle of the Labyrinth", she informs Percy that she has seen Luke Castellan using the entrance to the Labyrinth and that she has also seen Quintus/Daedalus using the entrance to the Labyrinth.

Echidna – Part woman, part snake. She is the wife of Typhon and the mother of Cerberus, Chimera, Hydra, the Nemean Lion, and Ladon as well as several others not in the series. She is first seen as an old lady who owned a chihuahua which was actually Chimera in disguise. Echidna also detests that there is a marsupial that was named after her. She assisted Chimera in fighting Percy at the top of the St. Louis Arch. She and Chimera disappeared after Percy dove into the water.
Eidolons – A race of spirits that can possess demigods. In The Mark of Athena, the Eidolons work for Gaea.
Empousai – Seductive shape-shifting women who are similar in appearance to vampires but have one shaggy donkey leg and one bronze leg. Two Empusa pose as cheerleaders in "The Battle of the Labyrinth." In The Last Olympian, an unnamed Empousai appears as part of the truce party along with Prometheus, Morrain, and Ethan Nakumura. She stated that she was among the things that was released from Pandora's pithos (Pandora's Box).Kelli – An Empousai that poses as a cheerleader in "The Battle of the Labyrinth." She was killed by Annabeth. In "The House of Hades," Kelli is among the Empousai that make their way to the Doors of Death so that Kelli can get even with Percy. With the help of Bob the Titan, Percy and Annabeth defeat Kelli and the Empousai.
Seraphone – An Empousai who distrusts Kelli and fears Hecate. In "The House of Hades," Seraphone is among the Empousai that make their way to the Doors of Death. When they attack Percy and Annabeth, Annabeth tricks the Empousai into believing that Kelli was useless and weak and that she was leading them all into danger. Annabeth tells them to follow Serephone as she was older and wiser. Hearing this made Serephone happy and declared that she was a leader. Kelli became angry and killed Serephone.
Tammi – An Empousai that poses as a cheerleader in "The Battle of the Labyrinth." She was killed by Percy Jackson.

Erymanthian Boar – The Erymanthian Boar is a giant boar, a servant of Pan who appears in The Titan's Curse. Percy, Thalia, Zoë, Grover, and Bianca first encounter it in Cloudcroft, New Mexico where Grover realizes its potential as a form of rapid transportation.
Faun – The fauns are Roman counterparts of satyrs. In contrast to Camp Half-Blood's helpful satyrs, the fauns are mostly beggars and are often used for amusement purposes.
Don – One of the Fauns that live at Camp Jupiter. In "The Son of Neptune," Percy and Hazel run into Don who needs money for making up bad lies. When Percy asks why the Fauns aren't like the Satyrs, Don states that Fauns are free-spirited.

Feather-Shooting Bird – A type of large black bird that shoots its feathers like arrows. In "The Demigod Files," Phobos summons them to fight Clarisse after he steals Ares' war chariot.
Fire-Breathing Horse – A race of horses bred at the Triple G Ranch for war purposes. Some are shown to pull Ares' war chariot.
Flesh-Eating Horse – A group of female horses bred at the Triple G Ranch. Some of them tried to eat Percy while he was cleaning the stables.
Flesh-Eating Sheep – A race of carnivorous sheep owned by Polyphemus. They help to guard the Golden Fleece. Described as being a big as a hippopotamus and attacking like piranhas.
The Furies – The Furies are Hades' chief servants and torturers and they personally searched for Hades's Helm of Darkness, believing that Percy had stolen it.Alecto – Alecto acted as Percy's pre-algebra teacher, Mrs. Dodds, in the first book. She is Hades's main servant and acted as the lawyer who rescued Nico and Bianca di Angelo from the Lotus hotel.
Megaera – A Fury representing grudging.
Tisiphone – A Fury representing avenged murder.

Gegeines – A race of six-armed giants in leather loincloths who previously fought Jason and the Argonauts. They appear in The Lost Hero where they are summoned by Enceladus to fight Jason, Piper, and Leo.
Geryon – In this series, Geryon is described as having a normal head, a face weathered and brown from years in the sun, slick black hair, a pencil-thin moustache, two very beefy legs wearing a very large pair of Levis and 3 chests wearing a different colored shirt: green, yellow and red. In "The Battle of the Labyrinth," he is the owner of Triple G Ranch with Orthrus guarding the ranch. He gave Percy an apparently impossible task; cleaning out the stables of carnivorous horses, one of the Labors of Hercules. Percy managed to completed the task, but Geryon went back on his deal to let Percy's friends free and the two fought. Percy found Geryon a strong opponent, as Geryon's three hearts made him almost impossible to defeat. Percy defeated Geryon with a well placed arrow (thanks to Hera) that went through Geryon's side hitting all three hearts at once, killing Geryon. In The House of Hades, Geryon had cursed Percy to feel the pain he had when Percy killed him. The Arai later told Percy about this. Percy later spotted Geryon among the characters awaiting their turn to go through the Doors of Death.
Ghoul – The Ghouls serve as security guards in the Underworld and make a sound that is similar to bats. They escort the souls of the wicked to the Fields of Punishment as seen in "The Lightning Thief" when they take a preacher who had been scamming people there.
Giant Badger – A giant badger. In "The Last Olympian," it was mentioned that Gleeson Hedge tried to fend off the Giant Badgers and tried to summon Pan to help him to do that.
Giant Crab – A giant crab that might be Cancer. Percy fought it in the Princess Andromeda during his mission with Charlie. He defeated it by stabbing the soft tissue on its belly.
Giant Eagle – A giant-size eagle that appears throughout The Heroes of Olympus series. The Giant Eagles are mainly used by the Romans for transporting and protecting Roman demigods.
Giant Scorpion – A giant-sized scorpion. Daedalus (under the alias of Quintus) ordered some Giant Scorpions from the Triple G Ranch and kept them in their boxes in the Sword Fighting Arena. He eventually let them out in the camp's forest for a game.
Giant Sea Turtle – A large sea turtle who accompanied Sciron into attacking the Argo II as seen in The House of Hades.
Giant Snake – A large snake that might be Python. It attacked Tyson and Grover when they were in the Labyrinth as seen in "The Battle of the Labyrinth."
Giant Squid – A giant squid that might be the Kraken. It was among the sea monsters in Oceanus' army.
Gorgon – A Gorgon is a female humanoid creature with snakes for hair. Anyone who looks at the face of the Gorgon Medusa turns to stone.
Medusa – The Gorgon who is the sister of Stheno and Euryale. Under the moniker of "Aunty Em," she attempted to lure Percy, Annabeth, and Grover into a false sense of security and turn them into stone statues. She is defeated, and her severed head is mailed to the gods of Olympus as proof of the trio's courage (though Grover notes that it is more akin to impertinence). Percy's mom uses her head to turn Gabe Ugliano to stone. In the film adaptation, Medusa is played by Uma Thurman.
Stheno – A Gorgon who is the sister of Medusa and Euryale. In "The Lost Hero," she was mentioned to be among the characters who were brought back to life when the Doors of Death opened. Stheno is later found to be chasing Percy (with her sister Euryale) and is described by Percy as appearing as a dumpy old grandmother but with rooster feet and bronze boar tusk sticking out of the corners of her mouth.
Euryale – A Gorgon who is the sister of Medusa and Stheno.

Gray Sisters – The Gray Sisters are women who share one eye and one tooth. In "The Sea of Monsters," Percy, Annabeth, and Tyson run into the Gray Sisters who are in the form of three taxi drivers. During the Gray Sisters' argument, Percy manages to grab their eye and demand the location of which they had mentioned. They tell him 30, 31, 75, 12 which Percy didn't understand. He however gave the eye to Wasp and they drop the three off at Camp Half-Blood. Later at the campfire, Percy figures out that the numbers were used for longitude and latitude which leads to the Sea of Monsters. In the film adaptation, the Gray Sisters are played by Mary Birdsong, Yvette Nicole Brown, and Missi Pyle.
Griffin – A Griffin is a creature that is part eagle, part lion. They appear in The Son of Neptune where they are seen in Alcyoneus' camp.
Harpy – Harpies are winged spirits of sudden, sharp gusts of wind. They were known as the hounds of Zeus and were dispatched by the god to snatch away (harpazô) people and things from the earth. Sudden, mysterious disappearances were often attributed to the Harpies. There are three Harpies that were created by Zeus. They work in Camp Half-Blood as "the Cleaning Harpies" being allowed to eat any camper who stays in Camp Half-Blood past noon in the last day of the summer without completing their form or if the camper is caught sneaking out of their cabin at night. Percy Jackson refers to the "Cleaning Harpies" as if they were "crossbred with the dodo birds." The Harpies also cleaned the dishes with super-hot lava and are also good in mid-town traffic. In "The Titan's Curse," it is shown that there are some Harpies on the side of the Titans. In the film Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, a harpy (portrayed by Camille Atebe) worked as a barista at a coffee shop with a Hekatonkheires.
Aello – A Harpy whose name means "storm swift." She is a member of Camp Half-Blood's "Cleaning Harpies."
Celaeno – A Harpy whose name means "the dark." She is a member of Camp Half-Blood's "Cleaning Harpies." Celaeno is also known as Podarge (which means "fleet-foot").
Ella – Ella is a Harpy who appears in The Son of Neptune. She has red hair and feathers, grey eyes, and a bony structure. She has extensive knowledge about the Romans and their culture. Ella is very valuable to the enemy side as she might have knowledge of several scrolls of prophecies. She has memorized a lot of books, and often recites a few prophecies from the Sybilline books that Octavian desperately wants. It is mentioned towards the end of The Son of Neptune, that Ella needed to be hidden from Octavian because of this important knowledge. She was one of the Harpies who was trying to torment the blind psychic Phineas. Near the end of the book, it is revealed that Tyson has a crush on Ella and that she has a crush on Tyson. Because of this, Ella remains with Tyson at Camp Jupiter.
Ocypete – A Harpy whose name means "the swift wing." She is a member of Camp Half-Blood's "Cleaning Harpies."

Hekatonkheires – The Hundred-Handed Giants of incredible strength, superior even to the Cyclopes. They are taller than mountains and their arms are as thin as noodles. In the film Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, a Hekatonkheires (portrayed by Anthony Shim) worked as a barista at a coffee shop with a harpy. Its appearance in the film was depicted as having eight arms when in the presence of demigods.
Briares – Briares is a Hekatonkheires. Briares was imprisoned by Kampê in the fourth book. It is mentioned that his brothers Cottus and Gyges have faded because people have forgotten about them. When Tyson finds that Briares (his hero) is too afraid to escape, he is heartbroken. At the end, Briares returns to help defeat Luke and the Titans. In The Last Olympian, Percy sees Briares helping Poseidon defeat the forces of Oceanus.

Hellhound – The Hellhounds are a main part of Luke's army and monsters in general. They are described as very large black dogs that have fire glowing in their eyes. They were also mentioned to reside in the Fields of Punishment. Daedalus owns a hound named Mrs. O'Leary, who, unlike her relatives, is loving and loyal. In "The Last Olympian," a bunch of Hellhounds are seen in Kronos' army where they snuck behind the demigod lines.
Mrs. O'Leary – Mrs. O'Leary is the only friendly hellhound to ever exist. Quintus (an alias of Daedalus) was her original owner, but, after asking Nico di Angelo to kill him, Percy becomes the hellhound's owner. While Percy is in the "mortal world", Charles Beckendorf takes care of her at Camp Half-Blood. She rescues Percy while in the Labyrinth.

Hippalectryon – The Hippalektryons are an endangered animal that is part chicken, part horse. In "Battle of the Labyrinth," they are seen at the Triple G Ranch.
Hippocampus – Hippocampi are horses from the waist up with a fish tail from the waist down. One is said to take a liking to Tyson, and he named it Rainbow. They are also called "fish ponies" by Tyson.
Rainbow – A Hippocamus who befriends Tyson in "The Sea of Monsters. Loves to give Tyson rides all over the sea.

Hyberborean – The Hyperboreans are a race of 30 ft. Snow Giants with blue skin ice-gray hair that come from Hyperborea. When wounded, the Hyperborean will bleed blue blood. They can freeze object and people using their frosty breath. When defeated, the Hyperborean freeze into ice. In The Last Olympian, the Hyperboreans are on the side of the Titans. In The Son of Neptune, a group of peaceful Hyperboreans were seen in Anchorage, Alaska
Morrain – A Hyperborean who appeared in The Last Olympian. He was a part of a truce meeting. He wasn't seen taking part in the Battle of Manhattan and his current fate is unknown.

Hydra – A serpentine monster with nine heads. Every time a head is chopped off, two new heads grow back. This monster appears in The Sea of Monsters where its life force is linked to the Monster Doughnut Shop, as another one pops up every time the Hydra regrows a head. It was destroyed by the cannons of the CSS Birmingham. In The Mark of Athena, Percy fights a Hydra when he, Jason, and Piper are on a mission to rescue Nico from Ephialtes and Otis. In The Lightning Thief film, the creature takes the form of five janitors (played by Tom Pickett, Keith Dallas, V.J. Delos-Reyes, Spencer Atkinson, and Tim Aas) in the Parthenon replica in Tennessee and refers himself as "We." The Hydra is ultimately defeated by the use of Medusa's head.
Ichthyocentaur – The Ichthyocentaurs are creatures that have the upper bodies of men, the lower fore-parts of horses, ending in the serpentine tails of fish. Their brows were adorned with a pair of lobster-claw horns. In The Mark of Athena, the demigods encounter the Ichthyocentaurs who save them from Keto and her children. The Icthyocentaurs also run Camp Fish-Blood for Merpeople heroes.
Aphros – An Ichthyocentaur who is the half-brother of Chiron. He teaches home economics.
Bythos – An Ichthyocentaur who is the half-brother of Chiron. He teaches fighting.

Kampê – A snake-haired winged centauroid creature who is half-woman, half-dragon with the heads of various mutated wild animals growing from her human torso. She is a monster who imprisoned the Hundred-Handed Ones and Cyclopes during the First Great War. She is feared by all, and is defeated by Briares in the "Battle of the Labyrinth" by being crushed by boulders.
Karpoi – The spirits of the grain who are the size of toddlers. In "The Son of Neptune," Percy Jackson, Hazel Levesque, and Frank Zhang encounter three Karpoi.
Katobleps – A race of cow monsters that appear in The House of Hades.
Keres – The Keres are battlefield spirits of famine and disease who feed on violent deaths. They reside in the Underworld and support the Titans but do not assist them in "The Last Olympian." In "The Demigod Files," some of them attacked Percy, Thalia, and Nico. One of them poisoned Percy, yet "Bob the Titan" managed to heal him.
Ketos – Chiron mentions this giant sea monster in "The Titan's Curse".
Ladon – Ladon is a giant dragon who is one of the offspring of Echidna. It defends the Hesperides' apple tree. Ladon poisons Zoë Nightshade in The Titan's Curse.
Laistrygonian – The Laistrygonians are a race of 8 ft. muscular cannibal giants who were previously encountered by Odysseus. In "The Sea of Monsters," three Laistrygonians serve as the brawn of Kronos's army as seen in "The Sea of Monsters." Three of them infiltrated Percy's school as visitors from Detroit and attacked the students with flaming dodgeballs. They were defeated by Percy, Annabeth, and Tyson. In "The Battle of the Labyrinth," a Laistrygonian assisted Kelli the Empousai into capturing Percy, Annabeth, and Rachael where they were marched to Antaeus' lair. Two more Laistrygonians were seen in Daedalus' lair where they followed Minos and carrying Nico with them. When the Titan army made their way through the Labyrinth and attacked Camp Half-Blood, the Laistrygonians were among the monsters that took part in the attack. They were pushed back by the campers in Apollo's cabin and the Laistrygonians retreated when Grover unleashed the powers of Pan. In "The Last Olympian," The Laistrygonians were seen in The Battle of the Labyrinth. When one Laistrygonian tried to attack Sally Jackson, she managed to shoot it.
Joe Bob – A Laistrygonian.
Marrow Sucker – A Laistrygonian.
Skull Eater – A Laistrygonian.

Lamia – Lamia is the daughter of Hecate who was one of the former love interests of Zeus until Hera turned her into a monster after the death of her children. In "The Demigod Diaries" story titled "Son of Magic," Lamia is revived by Gaia to kill Hecate's son Alabaster Torrington. Alabaster manages to defeat Lamia until Hecate arrives to save both her children. According to Hecate, Lamia won't try attacking Alabaster again, knowing he could use that spell against her.
Lemures – A race of angry ghosts who are seen on multiple times in The House of Hades.
Leviathan – These are mentioned by Poseidon in "The Last Olympian" as giant sea creatures that are neutral in the war between Poseidon and Oceanus.
Lotus-eaters – A number of them run the Lotus Hotel and Casino in The Lightning Thief. The hotel is filled with arcade games that makes visitors not want to leave. They are also mentioned in the Odyssey by Homer.
Maenad – A bunch of Maenads appeared in The Demigod Diaries story "Leo Valdez and the Quest for Buford." They were seen skipping in a mall-shaped clearing in the Camp Half-Blood Forest where a Drakon appeared. They managed to easily rip it apart with their long white talons and their elongated wolf-like fangs.
Makhai – The Makhai are the spirits of battle and combat. In The Blood of Olympus, Asclepius used the Makhai and the Pylosian Mint in order to formulate a physician's cure.
Mania – The Mania are ghosts that personify insanity, madness and crazed frenzy. In The Blood of Olympus, Beryl Grace and Julian Ramírez-Arellano are among the Mania.
Manticore – The Manticore is a monst that has the face of a man, the body of a lion, and the tail of a scorpion. In Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, a Manticore (played by Daniel Cudmore) appeared as a top henchman of Luke Castellan. When it came to the fight at Polyphemus' lair, the Manticore wounded Annabeth before it was killed by Grover Underwood and Clarissa La Rue.
Dr. Thorn – A Manticore in human form that appeared in The Titan's Curse. Dr. Thorn is the vice-principal of Westover Hall (the school that Bianca and Nico di Angelo attended). He has two eyes of different colours, one blue and one brown. His nostrils flare up when he talks. He speaks in a French accent.He tries to kill people by using thorn like objects. He is angry that in the ancient days, the Gods forced him to live out in Persia, where he never had any decent challenges, as he would in Ancient Greece. He is killed by Dionysus.

Merpeople – A race of sea creatures that are half-human and half-fish. The male merpeople are called Mermen while the female merpeople are called Mermaids. In "The Last Olympian," Percy wakes up underwater near Atlantis where he sees various Merpeople in battle armor fighting the forces of Oceanus. There were even some Merpeople making graves for the Merpeople who fell in battle. They serve Poseidon.
Bill – A merman that was trained at Camp Fish-Blood by Aphros and Bythos.

Minotaur – The Minotaur is part-man, part bull. The monster of the labyrinth who chased Percy all the way to Camp Half-Blood. Percy defeats the monster atop Half-Blood hill and claims its broken horn as a spoil of war. The Minotaur returns in The Last Olympian as a general for Kronos's army at Williamsburg Bridge and now wearing armor. It was defeated by Percy again. In the film adaptation, the Minotaur's head resembles a Cape Buffalo's head.
Myrmekes – A race of giant ant-like creatures who like shiny things like gold. In "The Demigod Files," some Myrmekes trapped Charles Beckendorf in their nest.
Naiad – The Naiads are nature spirits that inhabit streams and rivers and lakes, or any fresh body of water.
Brooke – Naiad that inhabits the brook in Camp Half-Blood. Gave a warning to Leo, Piper and Jason about her "Crazy Cousins" in The Quest for Buford.

Nemean Lion – The Nemean Lion is a lion that is one of the children of Echidna and Typhon. It has a hard skin in which no weapon can penetrate. Luke and Atlas sent the Nemean Lion to the National Air and Space Museum to stop the group of questing Hunters and Demigods. It battled with Percy Jackson, but was hard to defeat because of its bulletproof and sword-proof pelt. Percy eventually defeated it by throwing astronaut food into its mouth thus exposing its one unprotected surface, its mouth.
Ophiotaurus – A half-cow/half-snake monster. It is an ancient creature which could bring down the gods if it were slain and its entrails were sacrificed on a brazier. It was nicknamed Bessie by Percy Jackson who initially assumed it was female, although Grover later informed him that it was a male. Percy saved it from a trawler's net after being fetched by the Hippocampi.
Bessie – Bessie is the Ophiotaurus Percy meets in "The Titan's Curse." Percy named it because of its bovine appearance, but it was in fact a male. Bessie was supposedly the creature that Artemis was hunting because it could destroy Olympus. She also briefly appeared in "The Last Olympian" where Percy sees him in an aquarium.

Orthrus – A two-headed dog owned by Geryon and brother to Cerberus.
Pegasus – Pegasi are winged horses that are named after the original mount of Bellerophon.
Blackjack – He is the pure black Pegasus and Percy's loyal friend. He is first introduced in the second book The Sea of Monsters on the Princess Andromeda, Luke's demon cruise ship, where Percy rescued him from Kronos's minions. Ever since then, Blackjack has felt like he has to pay Percy back for saving him and he does whatever Percy asks calling him "boss".
Guido – A light gray and white Pegasus who is friends with Blackjack. In "The Last Olympian," Guido and Porkpie aided Percy and Blackjack in the Battle of Manhattan.
Porkpie – A light gray and white Pegasus who is friends with Blackjack. In "The Last Olympian," Guido and Porkpie aided Percy and Blackjack in the Battle of Manhattan.
Scipio – Reyna's Pegasus who appears in The Son of Neptune. His nickname is "Skippy" because he's the color of peanut butter (the same color as chestnuts).

Peleus – A dragon that is now guarding the Golden Fleece which hangs on the tree that Thalia was previously within. He is possibly named after Peleus: Father of Achilles.
Pit Scorpion – A deadly type of scorpion that appears in "The Lightning Thief." When Luke brings Percy into the woods and reveals his allegiance to Kronos, he summoned a Pit Scorpion to attack Percy. He tells Percy he should not go for his sword, as the pit scorpion can kill in sixty seconds, and can jump up to fifteen feet. When Luke disappears, Percy manages to kill it even though it managed to sting him. Wood nymphs help Percy recover from its poison.
Satyr – Half man, half goat. Most of the Satyrs work at Camp Half-Blood. Their Roman counterpart are the Fauns. Grover Underwood is a satyr.
Council of Cloven Elders – A group of Satyrs whose main duty is to abide over the Satyrs' search for Pan. The Council of Cloven Elders reside in the forum within Camp Half-Blood's forest are responsible for determining which Satyrs are worthy of receiving a searchers' license. To achieve a searcher's license, a Satyr must be a successful protector where they must bring a Demigod to Camp Half-Blood alive.
Leneus – Leneus is a member of the Council of Cloven Elders who hates Grover and thinks he is a liar. He is killed in The Last Olympian and is reincarnated as a laurel. When he dies, Grover takes his place in the Council of Cloven Elders.
Maron – Maron is a member of the Council of Cloven Elders. He only appears in book four, when he, Silenus and Leneus try to exile Grover because they think that Pan, the god of the wild, is still alive and Grover is lying about his death. He and the other members of the Council are described as being old and fat satyrs.
Silenus – Silenus appears in books four and five. He is the leader of the Council of Cloven Elders and is shown to hate Grover calling him an "outcast" and a "liar." He also has suspicions that Grover is a spy.

Ferdinand – Ferdinand is Grover's uncle who was one of the victims of Medusa in the Garden Gnome Emporium. When Kronos' army was hiding out there in "The Last Olympian," his statue form is now missing an arm and has graffiti on it without Medusa to watch over it.
Ichneutae – Ichneutae is a satyr who is exclusive to the film Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters portrayed by Jordan Weller. Ichneutae was present when Clarisse won the obstacle tower. He was chosen by Dionysus to guide her to the Golden Fleece. Clarisse mentioned that he was eaten by Scylla and his last words were "I got this."
Lysas – Lysas was a satyr who was mentioned to have been the chosen one of Pan where he was tasked by the god himself to spread the word that "The great god Pan has died." Even though he refused to believe this, he spread the word to the world in Ephesos. In "The Lightning Thief," Grover Underwood mentions that a sailor off the coast of Ephesos heard a mysterious cry saying that Pan has died. It is revealed in "The Battle of the Labyrinth" that it was a satyr called Lysas.

Scylla – One of the two monsters (the other being Charybdis) who live on either side of a narrow channel of water in The Sea of Monsters. Should a ship sail too close to her, she uses her six heads to pluck off crew members on deck and devour them. According to Clarisse (daughter of Ares), Scylla would just pick up the whole boat and crushed the boat if the crew hid below deck. In the film Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, Scylla was mentioned by Clarisse to have eaten Ichneutae.
Scythian Dracaenae – A race of humanoid females with twin snake tails in place of legs. They make up a considerable portion of the Titan Lord's forces. In "The Sea of Monsters," Percy first encounters them on the Princess Andromeda. In "The Titan's Curse," some Scythian Dracaenae attacked Percy's group after he had defeated Atlas. In "The Battle of the Labyrinth," Percy fights a Scythian Dracaenae in Antaeus' lair. Percy almost immediately kills it much to Antaeus' disapproval. The Scythian Dracaenae also show up in the actual Battle of the Labyrinth as one of the main types of soldiers. In "The Last Olympian," the Scythian Dracaenae are seen taking part in the Titan Army's attack on Manhattan.
Queen Sess – The Queen of the Scythian Dracaenae who appears in "The Last Olympian." She fought Chiron alongside Kronos and was killed when Chiron fired one of his arrows in between Queen Sess' eyes.

Sea Serpent – A large serpent that lives in the sea. Deimos is seen riding one in "The Stolen Chariot." In "The Last Olympian," a sea serpent was seen amongst the sea monsters in Oceanus' army.
Sirens – The Sirens are dangerous bird women whose sweet songs lead many sailors to their deaths on the jagged rocks. In The Sea of Monsters, they almost killed Annabeth.
Skeleton – Skeletons are the undead troops that make up Hades' Undead Army. In "The Lightning Thief," Hades has skeletons in army uniforms guarding his palace. In "The Battle of the Labyrinth," Nico manages to employ them as part of a ritual that will enable him to call the spirit of his sister to speak with her. In "The Last Olympian," Nico and Hades manage to bring a troop of skeletons to help fight the Titans. They are later seen constructing a cabin at Camp Half-Blood which is dedicated to Hades. In the House of Hades they are on the demigods side and help them in the Hades's temple in Epirus.
Skolopendra – A sea monster that is 200 ft. long. It looks like a cross between a giant shrimp and a cockroach with a pink chitinous shell, a flat crayfish tail and millipede-type legs. Its face is a slimpy pink like an enormous catfish with two glassy dead eyes and a gaping toothless maw. It has a beard which has a numerous amount of tentacles sprouting from each nostril. In The Mark of Athena, Ceto sents Skolopendra after the demigods after their escape from Phorcys' aquarium. It attacked the Argo II when Leo forgot to turn the monster-detection system on. Percy describes Skolopendra as "shrimpzilla." Skolopendra withdraws into the ocean when Leo Valdez and Hazel Levesque throw test tubes filled with Greek Fire into its mouth.
Spartus – A troop of skeletons armed with weapons. They are usually summoned by planting dragon teeth in the ground and watering them with blood. In The Titan's Curse, some Spartoi ambushed Percy, Thalia, Zoe, Grover and Bianca in New Mexico. Due to her being a child of Hades, Bianca managed to destroy them. In The Son of Neptune, Frank (as a gift from his father) is given a spear with the tip of a dragon's tooth that when planted with raise one of the Spartoi, he uses this to defeat the basilisks outside of the R.O.F.L. headquarters, to kill some of the laistrygonians surrounding his grandmothers house then using his final charge to protect the mortals on a train from attacking Griffins.
Sphinx – A Sphinx is a monster with the head of a woman and the body of a lion. Percy Jackson and his friends encountered the Sphinx while navigating the labyrinth. Rather than tell riddles, the Sphinx asked historical questions which Annabeth refused to answer as an insult to her intelligence.
Stymphalian Birds – A flock of birds once attacked Camp Half-Blood in The Sea of Monsters. Percy and Annabeth used Chiron's music to scare them so Apollo's cabin could shoot them down. A flock of Stymphalian Birds attack the Argo 2 in "The House of Hades."
Sybaris – In The Titan's Curse, Atlas used her teeth to create Spartoi. In "The House of Hades," she is in the form of a kitten and is Bob the Titan's friend.
Talos – Talos is a giant automaton. Percy, Thalia, and Bianca fight a prototype of Talos in the Junkyard of the Gods. Apparently, he has a manhole at the base of his foot for 'servicing'. Bianca went in to mess up his circuit so they could defeat him. He fell on some power lines thus electrocuting Bianca.
Telekhine – The Telekhines are a race of dog-faced sea demons that reforged Kronos's blade in the fourth book. Some set Percy on fire in the fourth book. They also appear in the fifth book. In the fourth book, they are referred to as "telekhines." However, in the fifth book, they are referred to as "telkhines", without the second "e". This may be a typographical error or something different of the author's choice. In The Mark of Athena, some Telekhines are seen in a water tank at the Georgia Aquarium.
Trojan Sea monster – A type of sea monster that rampaged the coasts of Troy until it was slain by Heracles. It is also known as the Keto Trois. In The Lost Hero, Jason Grace claims to have slew this monster while fighting Porphyrion of the Gigantes.
Typhon – A very powerful monster. He sired many monsters by Echidna. He lives and sleeps inside Mount Saint Helens. Percy is such a powerful demigod that he almost wakes Typhon during his visit there. In The Last Olympian, Typhon awakes and moves across America destroying everything in his path. As he is concealed in mist, Typhoon's appearance is not described and appears as a freak storm. The gods of Olympus try to stop him, but he is too powerful. In the end, Poseidon and his army help defeat him where Poseidon opened up a tunnel that sends Typhon into Tartarus. Once Typhon was defeated, a wave of anemoi thuellai were born.
Unicorn – A horse with one horn. A herd of Unicorns are used as steeds for the campers of Camp Jupiter. A red-tinted Lares with the head of a wolf guards them.
Venti – A race of storm spirits that were born when Poseidon opened a tunnel that sent Typhon into Tartarus. Depending on how chaotic they are, Venti can appear as either smokey men with angel-like wings or smokey horses. In The Lost Hero, Aeolus sent the Venti to prevent Jason, Piper, Leo, and the Hunters of Artemis from rescuing Hera. Their Greek counterparts are anemoi thuellai.
Dylan – A ventus that was among the Venti that attacked Jason Grace, Piper McLean, and Leo Valdez as seen in The Lost Hero.
Tempest – A ventus in smokey horse form that appears in The Lost Hero. Grace tames Tempest so that it can help him fight Porphyrion. He is shown on the cover of The Mark of Athena with Jason riding him, but it isn't official that that is actually Tempest

Werewolf – A werewolf is a creature that is part man, part wolf. In The Lost Hero, King Lycaon led a pack of werewolves to kill Valdez and McLean. Most of the werewolves were defeated by the Hunters of Artemis.
Zombie – A bunch of Zombies were seen as passengers on the Princess Andromeda in The Sea of Monsters. Clarisse used the zombies of Confederate soldiers to operate the CSS Birmingham.


== MortalsEdit ==


=== Percy Jackson's familyEdit ===
Sally Jackson – Sally is Percy's mother, initially married to Gabriel Ugliano and later to Paul Blofis. In The Lightning Thief, she works in a candy shop. When she was younger, she aspired to be a writer. She is nearly killed by the Minotaur, but is discovered to be alive in the clutches of Hades. Percy travels to the Underworld to free her. In The Titan's Curse, Percy realizes she can see through the Mist, which she admits may have attracted Poseidon to her. Sally appears in all of the first five books. In the film adaptation, she is played by Catherine Keener.
Paul Blofis – Paul is Sally Jackson's boyfriend and later second husband, a high school English teacher whom Percy describes as looking like a detective from a police show. Percy and his mother eventually tell Paul the truth about the gods, and he only half believes them initially. But when Percy, Nico, and Mrs. O'Leary come unexpectedly to Sally's apartment, Paul fully believes and thinks it's "awesome!" He is a competent swordsman from stage combat training in college, and he assists in the fight to save Olympus in The Last Olympian. Percy had first referred to him as "Blowfish" and as did Poseidon when he first heard about him saying, "It was a shame because he rather liked blowfish."
Gabriel "Gabe" Ugliano – Gabriel Ugliano was Percy's stepfather. He is described as a loathsome man who is rude to Percy and demanding toward Percy's mother Sally. It is implied that he was physically abusive to her. Percy later learns Gabriel's strong human stench hid Percy and his mother from detection by monsters. At the end of The Lightning Thief, Percy's mother uses the severed head of Medusa to turn Gabe to stone. Sally sold Gabe's petrified body as a poker-playing statue to the Sogo art gallery. In the film adaptation, he is played by Joe Pantoliano.


=== Other mortalsEdit ===
Aunt Rosa - Aunt Rosa is Leo's aunt. She blamed Leo for causing the death of her sister, Esperanza. She turned his whole family against him and called him "El Diablo" (The Devil). She refused to take him in and sent him to a social services home, which he ran away from. In The Mark of Athena, Leo sees Nemesis as Aunt Rosa, as Nemesis takes the form of the person whom the viewer has the most hatred for.
Beryl Grace – Thalia and Jason Grace's mother was a television actress with whom Zeus broke his oath not to have more human children. Thalia describes her as flighty, demanding and neglectful of both her children, with a significant drinking problem where she died in a car accident. She is the first known mortal to bear children to both the Greek and Roman aspects of the same god (Zeus and Jupiter). Melinoe once impersonated her to frighten Thalia in The Demigod Files story "Percy Jackson and the Sword of Hades." She appears in The Blood of Olympus as a Mania. Beryl wants her son to come back to her and that they can be a family together. But Jason refuses and proclaims that he is no child of hers. After hearing this, Beryl disappears with a hiss or sigh of relief.
Esperanza Valdez – Esperanza is Leo's mother. She was a trained mechanical engineer who worked at a machine shop and as an inventor. She was killed in a fire caused by Gaea and only appears in flashbacks.
Frederick Chase – Dr. Chase is Annabeth's father, a professor of military history. He first appears in The Titan's Curse. He owns a Sopwith Camel. He and his daughter have had many disagreements, which caused her to run away from home at age seven. He lives in San Francisco with his wife and two sons. In The Titan's Curse, he battles monsters on the Princess Andromeda with bullets formed from celestial bronze. Frederick also appears in the Magnus Chase & The Gods of Asgard series, where he is called by his brother, Randolph, to visit Boston and search for his long-estranged nephew, Magnus.
Grandma Zhang – Frank's grandmother, and Emily Zhang's mother. A harsh, strict woman, she helped Frank go through the basics of Roman mythology and his ancestry before he departs for Camp Jupiter. Grandma Zhang was the one who saved a plank of fire that holds Frank's lifeline, a balance to his many gifts of power from both sides of his parents. In The Son of Neptune, she helps Frank get past the Laistrygonians. It is unknown whether she survived, as a white bird flew up when the fire happened.
Howard Claymore – Dr. Claymore is a mortal who appears solely in The Demigod Diaries story Son of Magic, written by Rick Riordan's son Haley Riordan. He is a scholar and author with theories about death; he is approached for help by a son of Hecate called Alabaster Torrington who is fleeing the consequences of siding with Kronos in The Last Olympian. Claymore later sacrifices himself so Alabaster can use an incantation to destroy a monster who is chasing him. Hecate brings him back to life in an imitation human body so that he can live on as Alabaster's protector.
Isabel – Isabel is Piper and Leo's schoolmate in the Wilderness School. She teases Piper for never meeting with her mother and for being a Cherokee, not knowing that Piper is the daughter of Hollywood star Tristan McLean.
Jane - Jane is Tristan's personal assistant. Piper dislikes her for taking Tristan's already little attention to bond with his daughter away from her. Through charmspeak, Jane is controlled by Medea to lure Tristan into Mount Diablo where he is kidnapped by Enceladus, and then shooing Piper away so she could not interfere. Nevertheless, Piper manages to discover the trick and rescue her father. Afterwards, Jane is fired and replaced by Mellie the cloud nymph.
Julian Ramírez Arellano – Julian is the father of Reyna and Hylla. Julian was a former soldier in Iraq before the birth of his eldest daughter. After he had Reyna, he started getting paranoid. He thought that his daughters were going after him and he eventually became a mania. One day, he attacked Hylla, knocking her out, and Reyna took a sword and killed what was left of him. Reyna and Hylla then fled from San Juan, Puerto Rico soon after.
Maria di Angelo – Maria di Angelo is Nico and Bianca's mother, an Italian diplomat's daughter. She died when Zeus struck the hotel she was staying in with lightning in an attempt to kill Bianca and Nico. Melinoe impersonated her to scare Nico.
Marie Levesque – Marie is Hazel's mother. She was manipulated by Gaea into helping raise Alcyoneus. She died in 1942 along with Hazel. She was sentenced to the Fields of Punishment but Hazel made a compromise with the judges so they could both be sent to the Fields of Asphodel. In The House of Hades, Hecate reveals that she was Marie's mentor, teaching her magic.
May Castellan – May is Luke's mother. Like Rachel Dare, she could see through the Mist. She went insane during a failed attempt to become the Oracle. She lives in the house where she had raised Luke, alternating between cheerful expectation that he will return home and visions of his terrible fate.
Mrs. Chase – Mrs. Chase is Frederick's wife and Annabeth's stepmother. She is an Asian woman and the mother of Annabeth's two half-brothers, both of whom she barely knows about. She is in dispute over Annabeth for causing ruckus around, which is one of the factors that led her to run away from home at the age of 7. Though Annabeth describes her in a negative light, Percy is stunned when he actually meets Mrs. Chase, who is kind and even wants Percy to tell Annabeth that she still has her home in San Francisco.
Nancy Bobofit – Nancy Bobofit is Percy and Grover's schoolmate in Yancy Academy in The Lightning Thief. She is a bully who frequently torments the two boys.
Rufus – Rufus was Hazel and Sammy's schoolmate in St. Agnes Academy for Colored Children and Indians during Hazel's first life. He was the leader of bullies who called Hazel a freak for summoning cursed stones and for being the daughter of a witch, but was always stopped by Sammy before he could hurt her even further.
Sammy Valdez - Sammy is Leo's great-grandfather and Hazel's former boyfriend. He is described as looking identical to Leo. He and Hazel studied in a segregated school for the colored, and Sammy defended Hazel whenever she was accused for being the daughter of a witch. Hazel received her first kiss from Sammy. However, the two separated when Hazel had to move to Alaska with her mother and never met with each other again since Hazel died shortly after. Though Hazel was led to believe that Sammy moved on quickly, a dream she has in The Mark of Athena makes her realize that Sammy remembered her well into his old age and had made the then newborn Leo promise to meet with her in his behalf.
Thomas McLean – Thomas is Tristan's and Piper's late father and grandfather, respectively. He was the one who gave Piper her name. Thomas believed in Cherokee myths, which are quite similar with Greek mythology.
Tristan McLean – Tristan is Piper's father, a movie star. He was one of Aphrodite's lovers, but did not at that time know that she was a goddess. He was captured by Enceladus in The Lost Hero, but Piper and her friends managed to save him. At the end of The Lost Hero, he is said to be back at work, though he does not remember the events of his capture. Like Piper, he identifies as Cherokee.
William Dare – William Dare is Rachel's father. He is the very wealthy owner of a land development company, and he first appears in The Last Olympian. Rachel hates her father because of his job, and he supported Rachel and loved her very dearlygoing to finishing school.


== ReferencesEdit ==