Non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) or gluten sensitivity (GS) is a syndrome in which patients develop a variety of intestinal and/or extraintestinal symptoms that improve when gluten is removed from the diet, after coeliac disease and wheat allergy are excluded.
It is recognized since 2010, in 3 scientific consensus, and listed among gluten-related disorders.
The pathogenesis of NCGS is not yet well understood. There are evidences that beside gliadin (main cytotoxic antigen of gluten), other proteins present in gluten and glutencontaining cereals (wheat, rye, barley, and their derivatives) may have a role in the development of symptoms. FODMAPs that are present in glutencontaining grains have recently been identified as a possible cause of gastrointestinal symptoms in NCGS patients. (see section "Causes" and section "Research")
In a review of May 2015 published in Gastroenterology, Fasano et al. conclude that although there is an evident "fad component" to the recent rise popularity of the gluten-free diet, there are also growing and unquestionable evidences about the existence of non-celiac gluten sensitivity.
It is believed that NCGS is the most common syndrome of gluten intolerance, with a prevalence estimated to be 6-10 times higher than that of celiac disease. As no biomarker for diagnosing this condition is available, its diagnosis is made by exclusion of other gluten-related disorders, namely by excluding celiac disease and related autoimmune disorders and excluding wheat allergy.


== SymptomsEdit ==
Reported symptoms of NCGS are similar to those of coeliac disease, with most patients reporting both gastrointestinal and nongastrointestinal symptoms. In the “classical” presentation of NCGS, gastrointestinal symptoms are similar to those of irritable bowel syndrome, and are also not distinguishable from those of wheat allergy, but there is a different interval between exposure to wheat and onset of symptoms. Wheat allergy has a fast onset (from minutes to hours) after the consumption of food containing wheat and could be anaphylaxis.


=== Gastrointestinal symptomsEdit ===
Gastrointestinal symptoms may include any of the following: abdominal pain, bloating, bowel habit abnormalities (either diarrhea or constipation), nausea, aerophagia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and aphthous stomatitis.


=== Non-gastrointestinal symptoms and associated diseasesEdit ===
Extra-intestinal symptoms, which can be the only manifestation of NCGS even in absence of gastrointestinal symptoms, may be any of the following systemic manifestations: headache or migraine, “foggy mind”, fatigue, fibromyalgia, joint and muscle pain, leg or arm numbness, tingling of the extremities, dermatitis (eczema or skin rash), allergies, atopic disorders, depression, anxiety, anemia, iron-deficiency anemia, folate deficiency, asthma, rhinitis, eating disorders or autoimmune diseases.
Above 20% of people with NCGS have IgE-mediated allergy to one or more inhalants, foods or metals, among which most common are mites, graminaceae, parietaria, cat or dog hair, shellfish and nickel.
Aproximately, 35% of patients suffer some food intolerances associated to gluten sensitivity, mainly lactose intolerance.
Among extra-intestinal manifestations, NCGS seems to be involved in some neuropsychiatric disorders, principally schizophrenia, autism and peripheral neuropathy, and also ataxia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).


== CausesEdit ==
The pathogenesis of NCGS is not yet well understood. It was hypothesized that gluten, like occurs in coeliac disease, is the cause of NCGS. Nevertheless, besides gluten, other components in wheat, rye, barley, and their derivatives, including amylasetrypsin inhibitors (ATIs) and FODMAPs, seem have a role in the development of symptoms.


=== Other proteins in glutencontaining cerealsEdit ===
Some patients may have a reaction to other proteins present in glutencontaining cereals that are able to inhibit amylase and trypsin (-α-amylase/trypsin inhibitors [ATIs]). ATIs are part of the plant's natural defense against insects and was shown to cause toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated intestinal inflammation in humans. These TLR4-stimulating activities of ATIs are limited to glutencontaining cereals (wheat, rye, barley, and derivatives) and they may be the inducers of innate immunity in people with coeliac disease or NCGS. ATIs resist proteolytic digestion.
ATIs are about 2%-4% of the total protein in modern wheat and 80%-90% in gluten.
Detlef Schuppan, whose research team discovered this role of the ATIs, holds that modern wheat cultivations are bred to have a high ATI content and that this may play a role in the onset and course of disorders such as celiac disease and gluten sensitivity. However, it has been questioned whether there is sufficient empirical evidence to support this claim, as there are no known studies that directly compare heritage and modern wheat genotypes for ATI activity.
Also wheat germ agglutinin is considered to be a possible trigger of NCGS-like symptoms.


=== FODMAPsEdit ===
FODMAPs (Fermentable Oligosaccharides, Disaccharides, Monosaccharides And Polyols) that are present in glutencontaining grains have recently been identified as a possible cause of gastrointestinal symptoms in NCGS patients, in place of, or in addition to, gluten.
In a review of May 2015 published in Gastroenterology, Fasano et al. conclude that FODMAPs cause mild wheat intolerance at most, which is mainly limited to gastrointestinal symptoms.


== DiagnosisEdit ==

A 2015 systematic review classified non-celiac gluten sensitivity as a "controversial emerging disorder", since uncertainty remains about diagnostic criteria and the classification of people who may have the condition.
A literature review of 2014 found that patients suffering from NCGS "are a heterogeneous group, composed of several subgroups, each characterized by different pathogenesis and clinical history, and, probably, clinical course" and that NCGS diagnosis can be reached only by excluding celiac disease and wheat allergy. Another review article emphasizes that a final confirmation of NCGS diagnosis requires, additionally, a positive oral gluten challenge after at least three weeks of gluten-free diet.
There are indications that patients with NCGS show a reappearance of symptoms in far shorter time than is the case for celiac disease: in NCGS, symptoms usually relapse in a few hours or days of gluten challenge.


== TreatmentEdit ==

After a reasonable exclusion of coeliac disease and wheat allergy, the subsequent step for diagnosis and treatment of NCGS, is to start a strict gluten-free diet (GFD) and to confirm if symptoms improve or resolve completely. Normally, this occurs within days to weeks of starting on a GFD.
As occurs in patients with coeliac disease, the diet must be strict and maintained, without making any dietary transgression.
It is not yet well known until now, what is the degree of tolerance of gluten cross contamination in people with NCGS. In patients with coeliac disease, the safe level of gluten intake is often referred to as "less than 50 mg/day” (50 ppm/day) and a 2008 systematic review tentatively concluded that consumption of less than 10 mg/day (10 ppm/day) is unlikely to cause histological abnormalities, but a safe level limit for gluten cross contamination in NCGS is not yet defined. There are evidences that also NCGS patients can present symptoms even after consumption of small amounts of gluten.
Whereas coeliac disease requires adherence to a strict lifelong gluten-free diet, it is not yet known whether NCGS is a permanent, or a transient condition. Theoretically, a trial of gluten reintroduction to observe reaction after 1-2 years of strict gluten-free diet might be advisable.


=== Management of patients with persistent symptomsEdit ===
Approximately, one third of NGCS patients, continue having symptoms, despite gluten withdrawal. Apart from a possible diagnostic error, there are multiple possible explanations.
The main reason is a poor dietary compliance, whether voluntary and/or involuntary. Because these patients don’t suffer coeliac disease (CD), they may have the mistaken idea that they don’t need strictly following gluten-free diet, although the ingestion of even small amounts of gluten can cause more immediate and obvious symptoms in people with NGCS than those with CD.
Patients may be inadvertently ingesting gluten, in the form of cross contamination or food containing it, among their ingredients. To find out if there are unintended ingestions of gluten, it must perform an exhaustive evaluation with the advice of a CD specialized dietitian.
In some cases, the amelioration of gastrointestinal symptoms with a gluten-free diet is only partial. This patients can significantly improve with a low FODMAPs diet in addition to gluten withdrawal.
Also, a subgroup of NCGS patients may not improve by eating commercially available gluten-free products, which are usually rich of preservatives and additives, because chemical additives (such as sulfites, glutamates, nitrates and benzoates) might have a role in triggering functional gastrointestinal symptoms of NCGS. These patients may benefit of a diet with a low content of these compounds.
Furthermore, associated to gluten sensitivity, NCGS people may often present IgE-mediated allergies to one or more foods and it is estimated that around 35% of patients suffer some food intolerances, mainly lactose intolerance.


== ResearchEdit ==
NCGS patients may develop anti-gliadin antibodies (AGA) and never have anti-tTG antibodies. Recent studies indicate that AGA IgG is high in slightly more than half of NCGS patients and that for these patients, unlike for coeliac disease patients, the IgG AGA decreases strongly over 6 months of gluten-free diet; AGA IgA is usually very low in NGCS patients.
There are many open questions on gluten sensitivity and, as stated in a review article, "there is general agreement in the scientific community that additional studies are needed to shed light on NCGS". In another review, it is emphasized that "it is still to be clarified whether this disorder is permanent or transient and whether it is linked to autoimmunity". It has not yet been established whether innate or adaptive immune responses are involved in NCGS, nor whether the condition relates specifically to gluten or rather relates to other components of the grain. The need for developing biomarkers for NCGS is frequently emphasized; for example, the authors of a recent review article indicate: "There is a desperate need for reliable biomarkers and/or an algorithm that include clinical, biochemical and histopathological findings which support the diagnosis of NCGS."
In a 2013 double-blind placebo-controlled trial (DBPC) by Biesiekierski et al. in a few patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), the authors found no difference between gluten or placebo groups and the concept of NCGS as a syndrome was questioned. Nevertheless, this study had probably design errors, which could have masked the true effect of gluten reintroduction.
A 2014 study found that the results of preliminary randomized, placebo-controlled research "suggest that short-term exposure to gluten can induce depressive symptoms in people with nonceliac gluten sensitivity".
Research has also attempted to discern, by double-blind placebo-controlled trials, between a "fad component" to the recent popularity of the gluten-free diet and an actual sensitivity to gluten or other components of wheat.
In a review of May 2015 published in Gastroenterology, Fasano et al. conclude that although there is an evident "fad component" to the recent rise popularity of the gluten-free diet, there are also growing and unquestionable evidences about the existence of non-celiac gluten sensitivity.


== See alsoEdit ==
Gluten-related disorders
List of questionable diseases


== ReferencesEdit ==