Gummadidala is a town in Medak district of Telangana, India. It is located 40 km north of Hyderabad. The history of this town dates back to Kakatiya dynasty reign. Gummadidala is adored with many temples including Lord Venkateswara,Sri Rama Temple with brothers and wives, Shivalayam,Hanuman Temple and the nearby Veerabhadra Swamy Temple (Bonthapally).
Gummadidala, being in the suburbs of Hyderabad, has been the hub of industries for the last two decades. There are a lot of industries and chemical companies, which provide employment for most of the nearby villagers.
Gummadidala is known for the variety of crops cultivated. Though paddy rice and maize are the major crops, other crops include cotton, jowar, sunflower, tomatoes (most of the tomatoes supplied to Hyderabad are grown here), chillies, brinjals, bitter gourd, and lot more. "Best Farmer" in the district, is not a new to the farmers of Gummadidala, as most of the awards belonged to them. They always try experimenting new methods and got many good results, despite being dependent on monsoons for water.
The forest spreading from Gummadidala to Narsapur, has been a new destination of Telugu Film Industry.
India's first rural information centre, Tejas Samadhana Kendra or General Resources and Information Dissemination (GRID) centre, designed and developed by the Indian Farmers and Industries Alliance (IFIA) and Federation of Farmers Association (FFA), opened its first online centre on July 13, 2004, at Gummadidala. GRID is an information kiosk with a data bank, coordinating with government agencies and consultancies for those who are seeking advice, besides giving feedback and training for the benefit of farmers through a wired network in association with local self-help groups. GRID will provide advice to individual farmers on a day-to-day basis through telephone, fax and internet. It will even air fortnight forecasts on weather, crop activities and management techniques with the market trend of farm produce and other operational schemes.
State Bank of India is having its branch here and is supporting the farmers by giving crop loans and to the Rice Millers by giving working Capital Cash Credit Advances.