The Fast and the Furious (also known as Fast & Furious) is an American franchise including a series of action films, which center around illegal street racing and heists, and various other media portraying the characters and situations from the films. Distributed by Universal Pictures, the series was established with the 2001 film titled The Fast and the Furious; followed by six sequels, three short films that tie into the series, and as of May 2015, it has become Universal's biggest franchise of all time.


== FilmsEdit ==


=== The Fast and the Furious (2001)Edit ===

The film is based on an article, titled "Racer X", about New York street clubs that race Japanese cars late at night. While elite street racer and ex-convict Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) and his crew: Jesse (Chad Lindberg), Leon (Johnny Strong), Vince (Matt Schulze) and Letty Ortiz (Michelle Rodriguez), are under suspicion of stealing expensive electronic equipment by hijacking moving trucks, Brian O'Conner (Paul Walker) is an undercover police officer who attempts to find out who exactly is stealing the equipment. He works for FBI agent Bilkins (Thom Barry) and LAPD Sgt. Tanner (Ted Levine).
Falling for Dominic's younger sister, Mia Toretto (Jordana Brewster), Brian later confesses to her his status as an undercover police officer and convinces her to come with him to save her brother and his friends from the truck drivers, who have now armed themselves to combat the robberies. He tracks Dominic's location by triangulating his cell phone signal and they arrive at the hijacking in-progress to find Letty, badly injured at the car accident, and Vince critically wounded, having lacerated his arm and been shot by the truck driver. Brian and Mia work together with Dominic, Leon and Letty to rescue Vince. Brian then makes the difficult decision to blow his cover to the crew by phoning in for a medivac. The revelation enrages Dominic, fleeing with Leon, Letty, and Mia as the medivac arrives for Vince.
Brian soon follows Dominic to his house and holds him at gunpoint to prevent him from fleeing further. Jesse arrives shortly afterwards, apologizing for his actions at Race Wars and pleading for Dominic's help with Johnny Tran (Rick Yune). Moments later, Tran and his cousin Lance Nguyen (Reggie Lee) perform a drive-by shooting, killing Jesse. Brian and Dominic chase them, with Dominic driving his late father's modified 1970 Dodge Charger. Dominic forces Lance's motorcycle off the road, severely injuring him, while Brian shoots and kills Tran. Afterwards, Brian and Dominic engage in an impromptu street race, narrowly avoiding a passing train. However, Dominic collides with a semitruck and rolls his car twice, injuring himself, and rendering the Charger undrivable. Instead of arresting him, Brian hands over the keys to his Supra and lets Dominic escape, using the line "I owe you a ten second car". After the credits, Dominic is seen driving through Baja California, Mexico in a 1970 Chevrolet Chevelle SS.


=== 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003)Edit ===

Watched by undercover Customs Agent Monica Fuentes (Eva Mendes), Brian is caught by US Customs agents and given a deal by agents Bilkins and Markham (James Remar) to go undercover and try to bring down drug lord Carter Verone (Cole Hauser) in exchange for the erasure of his criminal record. Brian agrees but only if he is given permission to choose his partner, refusing to partner with the agent assigned to watch him. Brian heads home to Barstow, California, where he recruits Roman Pearce (Tyrese Gibson), a childhood friend of Brian who had served jail time and is under house arrest, to help him. Pearce agrees, but only for the same deal Brian was offered, and with the help of Monica, Brian and Roman work together to take down Verone. After acquiring confiscated vehicles and being hired by Verone as his drivers, the duo return to a Customs/FBI hideout, where Roman confronts Markham over the latter's interference with the mission. After the situation is cooled down, Brian tells Bilkins and Markham that Verone plans to smuggle the money into his private jet and fly off, but also suspects something wrong with Monica's role in the mission.
Later, Brian and Roman race two of Verone's drivers for their cars and begin to devise a personal back up plan if the operation goes awry. Roman confronts Brian about his attraction to Monica and the constant threat of Verone's men. On the day of the mission, Brian and Roman begin transporting duffel bags of Verone's money, with two of Verone's men Enrique (Mo Gallini) and Roberto (Roberto Sanchez) riding along to watch Brian and Roman. Before the 15-minute window is set, the detective in charge, Whitworth (Mark Boone, Jr.), decides to call in the police to move in for the arrest, resulting in a high-speed chase across the city. The duo lead the police to a warehouse, where a scramble by dozens of street racers disorient the police. Following the scramble, police manage to pull over the Evo and the Eclipse, only to find out that they were driven by two members of Brian's new crew, former friends, Tej Parker (Ludacris) and Suki (Devon Aoki).
As Brian approaches the destination point, Enrique tells him to make a detour away from the airfield. Meanwhile, Roman gets rid of Roberto by using an improvised ejector seat powered by nitrous oxide. At the airfield, Customs Agents have Verone's plane and convoy surrounded, only to discover they are duped into a decoy maneuver while Verone is at a boatyard several miles away. As he knew Monica was an undercover agent, he gave her the wrong information on the destination point and plans to use her as leverage. When Brian arrives at the intended drop-off point, Enrique prepares to kill him when Roman suddenly appears and the both of them dispatch Enrique. Verone makes his escape aboard his private yacht, but Brian and Roman use the Camaro and drive off a ramp, crashing on top of the yacht. The duo manage to apprehend Verone and save Monica. With their crimes pardoned, Brian and Roman ponder on what to do next other than to settle in Miami when Brian mentions starting a garage. Roman asks how they would afford that and Brian reveals that he took some of the money, as Roman also reveals that his pockets aren't empty, having taken money for himself.


=== The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006)Edit ===

After totaling his car in an illegal street race, Sean Boswell (Lucas Black) is sent to live in Tokyo, Japan, with his father, a U.S. Navy officer, in order to avoid juvie or even jail. While in school, he befriends Twinkie (Bow Wow), a "military brat" who introduces him to the world of drift racing in Japan. Though forbidden to drive, he decides to race against Takashi (Brian Tee) aka D.K. (Drift King) who has ties to the Yakuza. He borrows a Nissan Silvia from Han Seoul-Oh (Sung Kang), now a business partner to Takashi, and loses, totaling the car because of his lack of knowledge of drifting – racing that involves dangerous hairpin turns. To repay his debt for the car he destroyed, Sean must work for Han. Later on, Han becomes friends with Sean and teaches the young racer how to drift. Takashi's uncle Kamata (Sonny Chiba) (the head of the Yakuza) reprimands Takashi for allowing Han to steal from him. Takashi confronts Han, Sean and Neela (Nathalie Kelley), and in doing so, they flee. During the chase, Han is killed in a car accident as his Veilside Mazda RX-7 catches on fire. Takashi, Sean, and his father become involved in an armed standoff which is resolved by Neela agreeing to leave with Takashi. Twinkie gives his money to Sean to replace the money Han stole, which Sean then returns to Kamata. Sean proposes a race against Takashi to determine who must leave Tokyo. Sean and Han's friends then build a Ford Mustang '67, with a Nissan Skyline inline 6 engine and other spare parts. Sean wins the race. Later, Sean is challenged by Dominic. This film's story occurs sometime after Fast & Furious 6 with a scene that was later made concurrent with events in Furious 7.


=== Fast & Furious (2009)Edit ===

About five years after the events of the first film, Dominic and his new crew (Letty, Han, Leo, Santos and Cara) have been hijacking fuel tankers in the Dominican Republic. When their trail gets too hot, Dominic disbands the crew. However, he is later informed that Letty has been killed in a car crash. Dominic returns to Los Angeles where he finds traces of nitro-methane at these crash site, and tracks the buyer of the gas to David Park. Meanwhile, Brian O'Conner, who has been working as an FBI agent, is tracking down a drug trafficker named Arturo Braga. When Brian and Dominic cross paths at David Park's apartment, Dominic is about to drop David out the window. But Brian intervenes, and works a scheme where he enters a street race where the winner would join Braga's team of drivers. Although Dominic wins the four-car race by bumping Brian's car, Brian later joins the team by replacing one of Braga's other drivers.
The team meets Fenix Calderon (Laz Alonso) who directs them to drive the heroin across the border using underground tunnels to avoid detection. Brian realizes that the drivers are to be killed following the mission, and when Fenix reveals to Dominic that he killed Letty, Dominic detonates the nitrous in his car, blowing up a bunch of vehicles. In the chaos, Brian hijacks the Hummer that is carrying the heroin. Dominic and Brian drive back to Los Angeles, hiding the heroin in an impound lot. When Dominic learns Brian was the last person to contact Letty, he attacks him until Brian reveals that Letty was working undercover for Brian, tracking down Braga in exchange for clearing Dominic's name. Brian negotiates with the agency to free Dominic if they can lure Braga into personally coming to exchange the heroin for cash. However, at the drop site, it is revealed that the Braga they arrested was a decoy, and that the real Braga (John Ortiz) has escaped, fleeing to Mexico.
Suspended from duty, Brian joins Dominic to go to Mexico and in hopes of catching Braga. Although Braga agreeably surrenders, they are pursued by Braga's men through town and then the tunnels. Fenix hits Brian's car with a T-bone right outside the tunnel exit, but before he can kill Brian, Dominic drives into Fenix. As the police arrive, Dominic refuses to escape, saying he is tired of running. Despite Brian's request for clemency, the judge sentences Dominic to 25 years to life. During the prison bus ride to Lompoc penitentiary, Brian and Mia, along with Leo and Santos, arrive in their cars and intercept the bus.


=== Fast Five (2011)Edit ===

When Dominic "Dom" Toretto is being transported to Lompoc Prison by bus, his sister Mia Toretto and friend Brian O'Conner lead an assault on the bus, causing it to crash and freeing Dom. While the authorities search for them, the trio escapes to Rio de Janeiro. Awaiting Dom's arrival, Mia and Brian join their friend Vince and other participants on a job to steal three cars from a train. Brian and Mia discover that agents from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) are also on the train and that the cars are seized property. When Dom arrives with the rest of the participants, he realizes that one of them, Zizi, is only interested in stealing one car, a Ford GT40. Dom has Mia steal the car herself before he and Brian fight Zizi and his henchmen, during which Zizi kills the DEA agents assigned to the vehicles. Dom and Brian are captured and brought to crime lord Hernan Reyes, the owner of the cars and Zizi's boss. Reyes orders the pair be interrogated to discover the location of the car, but they manage to escape and retreat to their safehouse.
While Brian, Dom, and Mia examine the car to discover its importance, Vince arrives and is caught trying to remove a computer chip from it. He admits he was planning to sell the chip to Reyes on his own, and Dom forces him to leave. Brian investigates the chip and discovers it contains details of Reyes' criminal empire, including the locations of US$100 million in cash.
Diplomatic Security Service agent Luke Hobbs (Dwayne Johnson) and his team arrive in Rio to arrest Dom and Brian. With the help of local officer Elena Neves, they travel to Dom's safehouse, but find it under assault by Reyes' men. Brian, Dom and Mia escape; Dom suggests they split up and leave Rio, but Mia announces she is pregnant with Brian's child. Dom agrees to stick together and suggests they steal the money from Reyes to start a new life. They organize a team to perform the heist: Han, Roman Pearce, Tej, Gisele, Leo, and Santos. Vince later joins the team after saving Mia from being captured by Reyes' men.
Hobbs and his team eventually find and arrest Dom, Mia, Brian, and Vince. While transporting them to the airport for extradition to the United States, the convoy is attacked by Reyes' men, who kill Hobbs' team. Hobbs and Elena are saved by Dom, Brian, Mia, and Vince as they fight back and escape, but Vince is shot in the process and dies. Wanting to avenge his murdered team, Hobbs and Elena agree to help with the heist. The gang breaks into the police station and tear the vault holding Reyes' money from the building using their cars, dragging it through the city. After an extensive police chase, Dom makes Brian continue without him while he attacks the police and the pursuing Reyes, using the vault attached to his car to smash their vehicles. Brian returns and kills Zizi while Reyes is badly injured by Dom's assault. Hobbs arrives on the scene and kills Reyes. Though Hobbs refuses to let Dom and Brian go free, he gives them a 24-hour head start to escape on the condition they leave the vault as is. However, the vault is empty as it had been switched during the chase. After splitting the cash (Vince's share is given to his family), they go their separate ways.
On a tropical beach, Brian and a visibly pregnant Mia relax. They are met by Dom and Elena. Brian challenges Dom to a final, no-stakes race to prove who is the better driver.
In a post-credits scene, Hobbs is given a file by Monica Fuentes concerning the hijack of a military convoy in Berlin, where he discovers a recent photo of Dom's former girlfriend Letty, who had been presumed dead.


=== Fast & Furious 6 (2013)Edit ===

Following their successful Rio heist, Dominic "Dom" Toretto and his professional criminal crew have fled around the world: Dom lives with Elena; his sister Mia lives with Brian O'Conner and their son, Jack; Gisele and Han live in Hong Kong; and Roman and Tej live in luxury.
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) agents Luke Hobbs and partner Riley Hicks investigate the destruction of a Russian military convoy by former British Special Forces soldier Owen Shaw’s crew. Hobbs persuades Dom to help capture Shaw by showing him a photo of the supposedly long-dead Letty Ortiz, Dom's former lover. Dom and his crew accept the mission in exchange for amnesty, allowing them to return home to the United States.
In London, Shaw's hideout is found, but this is revealed to be a trap, distracting them and the police while Shaw's crew performs a heist at an Interpol building. Shaw flees by car, detonating his hideout behind him and disabling most of the police, leaving Dom, Brian, Tej, Han, Gisele, Hobbs, and Riley to pursue him. Letty arrives to help Shaw, shooting Dom without hesitation before escaping. Back at their headquarters, Hobbs tells Dom's crew that Shaw is stealing components to create a deadly device, intending to sell it to the highest bidder. Meanwhile, Shaw's investigation into the opposing crew reveals Letty's relationship with Dom, but she is revealed to be suffering from amnesia.
Dominic's crew learns that Shaw is connected to a drug lord imprisoned by Brian, Arturo Braga. Brian returns to the United States as a prisoner to question Braga, who says Letty survived the explosion that was thought to have killed her; Shaw took her in after discovering her amnesia. With FBI help, Brian is released from prison, regrouping with the team in London. Dom challenges Letty in a street racing competition; afterwards, he returns her cross necklace he had kept. After Letty leaves, Shaw offers Dom a chance to walk away, threatening to otherwise hurt his family; Dom refuses.
Tej tracks Shaw's next attack to a Spanish NATO base. Shaw's crew assaults a highway military convoy carrying a computer chip to complete his deadly device. Dom's crew interferes while Shaw, accompanied by Letty, commandeers a tank, destroying cars en route. Brian and Roman manage to flip the tank before it causes further damage, resulting in Letty being thrown from the vehicle and Dom risking his life to save her. Shaw and his crew are captured, but reveal Mia has been kidnapped by Shaw. Hobbs is forced to release Shaw, and Riley, Shaw's covert accomplice, leaves with him; Letty chooses to remain with Dom.
Shaw's group board a large moving aircraft on a runway as Dom's crew gives chase. Dom, Letty, and Brian board the craft; Brian rescues Mia, escaping in an onboard car. The plane attempts take-off, but is held down by excess weight as the rest of the team tether the plane to their vehicles. Gisele sacrifices herself to save Han from a henchman; Letty kills Riley and escapes to safety, but Dom pursues Shaw and the computer chip. As the plane crashes into the ground, Shaw is thrown from it, and Dom drives a car inside through the exploding plane. Dom reunites with his crew, and gives the chip to Hobbs to secure their pardons.
Dom and the others return to the Toretto's old family home in Los Angeles. Hobbs and Elena, now working together, arrive to confirm the crew’s freedom; Elena accepts that Dom loves Letty. As Roman says grace over the crew’s meal, Dom asks Letty if the gathering feels familiar; she answers no, "but it feels like home."
Ultimately, Han flees from unseen enemies in a high-speed pursuit in Tokyo, when he is suddenly rammed by an oncoming car which has been covertly following the chase. The other car's driver walks away from the scene after leaving Letty's cross necklace by the crash site, and the driver calls Dom as Han's car fatally explodes, saying "You don't know me. You're about to."


=== Furious 7 (2015)Edit ===

After defeating Owen Shaw and his crew and securing amnesty for their past crimes, Dominic "Dom" Toretto, Brian O'Conner, and the rest of their team have returned to the United States to live normal lives again. Brian begins to accustom himself to life as a father, while Dom tries to help Letty Ortiz regain her memories. Meanwhile, Owen's older brother, Deckard Shaw, breaks into the secure hospital the comatose Owen is being held in and swears vengeance against Dom, before breaking into Luke Hobbs' DSS office to extract profiles of Dom's crew. After revealing his identity, Shaw engages Hobbs in a fight, and escapes when he detonates a bomb that severely injures Hobbs. Dom later learns from his sister Mia that she is pregnant again and convinces her to tell Brian. However, a bomb, disguised in a package sent from Tokyo, explodes and destroys the Toretto house just seconds after Han, a member of their team, is killed by Shaw in Tokyo. Dom later visits Hobbs in a hospital, where he learns that Shaw is a rogue special forces assassin seeking to avenge his brother. Dom then travels to Tokyo to claim Han's body, where he meets and races Sean Boswell, a friend of Han's, who gives him personal items found at Han's crash site.
Back at Han's funeral in Los Angeles, Dom notices a car observing and chases after the vehicle, driven by Shaw. Both prepare to fight, but Shaw slips away when a covert ops team arrives, led by Frank Petty. Petty says that he will assist Dom in stopping Shaw if he helps him obtain the God's Eye, a computer program that uses digital devices to track down a person, and save its creator, a hacker named Ramsey, from a mercenary named Jakande. Dom, Brian, Letty, Roman Pearce, and Tej Parker then airdrop their cars over the Caucasus Mountains in Azerbaijan, ambush Jakande's convoy, and rescue Ramsey. The team then heads to Abu Dhabi, where a billionaire has acquired the flash drive containing the God's Eye, and manages to steal it. With the God's Eye, the team manages to track down Shaw, who is waiting at a remote factory. Dom, Brian, Petty and his team attempt to capture Shaw, but are ambushed by Jakande and his militants, and they are forced to flee while Jakande obtains the God's Eye. At his own request, Petty is then left to be evacuated by helicopter. Left with no other choice, the team decides to return to Los Angeles to fight Shaw, Jakande and his men on their home turf. Meanwhile, Brian promises Mia that once they deal with Shaw, he'll dedicate himself to their family full-time.
While Jakande pursues Brian and the rest of the team with a stealth helicopter and a drone, Ramsey attempts to hack into the God's Eye while sharing her mobile between their vehicles. Hobbs, seeing the team in trouble, breaks out of hospital and destroys the drone. Ramsey then regains control of the God's Eye and shuts it down. Meanwhile, Dom and Shaw engage in a one-on-one brawl on a parking garage, before Jakande intervenes and attacks them both, and Shaw is defeated when part of the parking garage collapses beneath him. Dom then launches his vehicle at Jakande's helicopter, tossing Shaw's bag of grenades onto its skids, before injuring himself when his car lands and crashes. Hobbs then shoots the bag of grenades from ground level, destroying the helicopter and killing Jakande. When Dom remains unconscious, the team fears that he is dead. As Letty cradles Dom's body in her arms, she reveals that she has regained her memories, and that she remembers their wedding. Dom regains consciousness soon after, remarking, "It's about time".
Later, Shaw is taken into custody by Hobbs and locked away in a secret, high-security prison. Meanwhile, at a beach, Brian and Mia play with their son while Dom, Letty, Roman, Tej and Ramsey observe, acknowledging that Brian is better off retired with his family. Dom silently leaves, but Brian catches up with him at a crossroad. As Dom remembers the times that he had had with Brian, they bid each other farewell and drive off in separate directions.


=== Fast 8 (2017)Edit ===
Universal chairwoman Langley stated in 2014 that a total of 10 films were likely to be made. On April 9, 2015, producer Neal H. Moritz told The Hollywood Reporter that the filmmakers would meet to discuss the sequel in a week's time. Neither a director, nor a writer have been finalized for the eighth film. Moritz said, "The story is going to have to be something enticing for all of us. It has to be as good as or better than Furious 7."
In regards to Furious 8 going to New York, Vin Diesel said, "Well, I was trying to keep it close to the vest throughout the release. Paul Walker used to say that eight was guaranteed. And in some ways, when your brother guarantees something, you sometimes feel like you have to make sure it comes to pass." Diesel added, "So if fate has it, F8...if fate has it, then you'll get this when you hear about it. Seven was for Paul, eight is from Paul." At the 2015 Universal CinemaCon in Las Vegas, Diesel announced that the eighth installment of the franchise will be released on April 14, 2017.
Universal Pictures did not reveal any details regarding whether Diesel's co-stars, Paul's brothers Caleb and Cody, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Tyrese Gibson, Chris 'Ludacris' Bridges, Kurt Russell, Nathalie Emmanuel, Lucas Black and Elsa Pataky would return to make the eighth installment, though Johnson eventually confirmed that he would appear. Jason Statham has confirmed that he will be returning as well. Rodriguez later confirmed her involvement.
In 2015, Diesel stated that the film, officially titled Fast 8, would take place in New York. Chris Morgan will write his sixth script in the franchise and Neal H. Moritz will return to produce the film. Moritz later stated, "The story is going to have to be something enticing for all of us... it has to be as good as or better than Furious 7." At the 2015 CinemaCon in Las Vegas, Diesel announced the film for an April 14, 2017 release date. In September 2015, Diesel has announced on his Facebook page that there will be a final trilogy of the franchise and a director will be announced on his page. In October 2015, Diesel later posted on Facebook that he may direct the eighth film or the original film director Cohen. In October 2015, Deadline reports that the film series cinematographer Ericson Core and Louis Leterrier are being consider to direct the film. Both The Hollywood Reporter and Variety reported that the studio has Leterrier, F. Gary Gray, Adam Wingard, and Will Eubank on the shortlist to direct the film. On October 8, 2015, Gray announced on his Twitter account that he had signed on to direct the eighth film. According to International Movie Database, Gibson and Bridges announced that they will be returning for the film. Words regarding on whether Walker's younger brother, Cody, who stood in along with other brother Caleb to complete the unfinished scenes of Furious 7, would return or not. For awhile it seemed as though he would be returning, but was removed form IMDB, which leaves his status with the film franchise unclear. Diesel also announced that '8 will be the start of a final trilogy that will be a tribute to Paul.' Many reports have the last trilogy returning to its street racing roots for it was 'Paul's Vision' for the series. Also, reports stated that 8 will focus on Russell's character, Mr. Nobody and it will take place primarily in New York City, it will show his backstory and his life as well as the action packed adventure from the previous four films in the series. As of November 16, 2015, the plot for Fast 8 has yet to cut out Walker's character, Brian O'Connor from the film. The film will also take place in Tokyo, Dominican Republic and Los Angeles.


== Short filmsEdit ==


=== Turbo-Charged Prelude (2003)Edit ===

The short film was included on a new print of the DVD of the first film in June 2003 to bridge the first two films. Brian O'Conner packs his bags and leaves Los Angeles, before the LAPD gets a chance to arrest him for letting Dominic escape. While the FBI launch a national manhunt for him, Brian travels across Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, winning in every street race he participates in, with his red Mitsubishi 3000GT. However, he is forced to ditch his car at a motel in Dallas when police officers are notified of his presence. When they collect the car, he manages to hitch a ride from an unknown woman, despite her knowing who he really is. She drops him at a used car lot, with him realizing she knows that he is a wanted man. There, he buys a green Nissan Skyline GT-R R34. Later, collecting money from street races, he modifies the car with new rims and repaints it silver, with blue lightning vinyls on the sides, before traveling eastbound and winning more races on the way. Upon reaching Atlanta, Georgia, Brian heads south toward Miami, Florida, where he sees Slap Jack's Toyota Supra and Orange Julius' Mazda RX-7 (both 2 Fast 2 Furious characters) before the screen reads "2 be continued…".


=== Los Bandoleros (2009)Edit ===

Leo Tego (Tego Calderón) is in a Dominican Republic prison, ranting about corporations holding back the electric car and starting wars for oil. Meanwhile, on the streets, Rico Santos (Don Omar) chats to an old man unable to find enough gas. Han Seoul-Oh (Sung Kang) arrives and is collected from the airport by Cara Mirtha (Mirtha Michelle) and Malo (F. Valentino Morales). They drive him back to Santos' house, where his aunt Rubia (Adria Carrasco) is struggling with rising prices linked to the cost of gasoline and Dominic is working on his car. The team then enjoy a welcome meal with the family. After breaking Leo out of prison, they head to a club, where Han and Cara flirt, while Dominic meets up with local politician Elvis (Juan Fernandez), who informs them of a window of opportunity to hijack a gasoline shipment. While relaxing at the club afterwards, Dominic is surprised by the arrival of Letty, who has tracked him from Mexico. The two drive together to the beach, where they "rekindle their relationship".


=== Fast & Furious Flow (2015)Edit ===
A billionaire (iRome) has 24 hours to deliver a mysterious briefcase to Hector (Noel Gugliemi) after he receives it from Malik (Neil Brown Jr.). Once the briefcase is delivered to Hector (Noel Gugliemi) it is revealed that the briefcase is holding a donation for Paul Walker's foundation ReachOutWorldWide. It is not canon with the rest of the franchise as it serves as a tribute to Paul Walker and ReachOutWorldWide.


== ChronologyEdit ==
Two short films were released, bridging the gap between two or more of the feature films in the series. The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift also does not take place third in the series but instead sixth of the feature films. Below is a table of all films, both short and feature length, in chronological order. Real world release dates are also noted.


== CharactersEdit ==


== Crew and otherEdit ==


== ReceptionEdit ==


=== Box office performanceEdit ===


=== Critical and public responseEdit ===


== Theme Park AttractionsEdit ==
Universal Orlando Resort recently announced an attraction coming in 2017 based on the popular film series. Earlier in 2015 Universal Studios Hollywood opened a portion of their studio tour based on the films.


== MerchandisingEdit ==


=== Video gamesEdit ===
The film series has spawned several racing video games for various systems. The arcade game The Fast and the Furious (known as Wild Speed in Japan) was released by Raw Thrills in 2004. In 2006, the video game The Fast and the Furious was released for the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable. Several games (The Fast and the Furious: Pink Slip, Fast & Furious, Fast Five, Fast & Furious: Adrenaline, Fast & Furious 6: The Game and Fast & Furious Legacy) have all been released for iOS and are available on the iTunes App Store, for Android devices there is official version of Fast & Furious 6: The Game and "Fast & Furious Legacy". In 2013, Fast & Furious: Showdown was released for the PC (Windows OS), Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii U and Nintendo 3DS. Various cars, locations and characters from the series have also appeared in the Facebook game Car Town. In 2015, in a deal with Microsoft Studios, a standalone expansion of Forza Horizon 2 for Xbox One and Xbox 360 was released titled Forza Horizon 2 Presents Fast & Furious.


=== Toys and model kitsEdit ===
Racing Champions released diecast metal replicas of the film's cars in different scales from 1/18 to 1/64. RadioShack sold ZipZaps micro RC versions of the cars in 2002. 1/24 scale plastic model kits of the hero cars were manufactured by AMT Ertl. Johnny Lightning under the JL Full Throttle Brand released 1/64th and 1/24th models of the cars from Tokyo Drift. These models were designed by Diecast Hall of Fame designer Eric Tscherne. Greenlight also sold some cars from the new films from the series and some of them from the previous series.


== Related filmsEdit ==
Although not officially part of The Fast and the Furious film series, Sung Kang plays a character named Han in the film Better Luck Tomorrow, directed by Justin Lin, who also directed The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift, Fast & Furious, Fast Five & Fast & Furious 6. In Fast Five, Gisele Yashar attributes Han's constant need to occupy his hands to him being a former smoker, an easter egg reference according to Lin's DVD commentary. The computer animated short film Tokyo Mater spoofs The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift.


== See alsoEdit ==
List of highest-grossing film franchises


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website
The Fast and the Furious at the Internet Movie Database