This is a list of the bird species recorded in Bermuda. The avifauna of Bermuda include a total of 375 species, a remarkable number considering that the island is a mere 53.3 square kilometres. Ten of these have been introduced by humans; the mallard also occurs naturally as a non-breeding migrant. 207 are rare or accidental. Two species listed are extirpated in Bermuda; Audubon's shearwater formerly bred but is now only a vagrant while there are a few old records of Eskimo curlew occurring on migration but none since 1930. Seven species are globally threatened.
This list's taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) follow the conventions of the American Ornithologists' Union checklist (7th edition and supplements). The species counts found in each family account reflect this taxonomy. Introduced and accidental species are included in the total counts for Bermuda. Species marked accidental are those listed as "rare" or "very rare" in Dobson (2002).
The following tags have been used to highlight several categories, but not all species fall into one of these categories. Those that do not are commonly occurring native species.
(A) Accidental - a species that rarely or accidentally occurs in Bermuda
(I) Introduced - a species introduced to Bermuda as a consequence, direct or indirect, of human actions
(Ex) Extirpated - a species that no longer occurs in Bermuda although populations exist elsewhere
(E) Extinct -a species that is extinct globally


== Ducks, geese and swans ==
Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae

The family Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, flattened bills, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to an oily coating.
West Indian whistling duck, Dendrocygna arborea (A)
Fulvous whistling duck, Dendrocygna bicolor (A)
Greater white-fronted goose, Anser albifrons (A)
Snow goose, Chen caerulescens (A)
Brant, Branta bernicla (A)
Canada goose, Branta canadensis (A)
Mute swan, Cygnus olor (A)
Tundra swan, Cygnus columbianus (A)
Wood duck, Aix sponsa
Gadwall, Anas strepera (A)
Eurasian wigeon, Anas penelope (A)
American wigeon, Anas americana
American black duck, Anas rubripes
Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos (I)
Blue-winged teal, Anas discors
Northern shoveler, Anas clypeata (A)
Northern pintail, Anas acuta (A)
Garganey, Anas querquedula (A)
Green-winged teal, Anas crecca
Canvasback, Aythya valisineria (A)
Redhead, Aythya americana (A)
Ring-necked duck, Aythya collaris
Ferruginous duck, Aythya nyroca (A)
Tufted duck, Aythya fuligula (A)
Greater scaup, Aythya marila (A)
Lesser scaup, Aythya affinis
Surf scoter, Melanitta perspicillata (A)
White-winged scoter, Melanitta fusca (A)
Black scoter, Melanitta americana (A)
Long-tailed duck, Clangula hyemalis (A)
Bufflehead, Bucephala albeola (A)
Common goldeneye, Bucephala clangula (A)
Hooded merganser, Lophodytes cucullatus
Common merganser, Mergus merganser (A)
Red-breasted merganser, Mergus serrator (A)
Ruddy duck, Oxyura jamaicensis (A)


== Loons ==
Order: Gaviiformes   Family: Gaviidae
Loons, known as divers in Europe, are a group of aquatic birds found in many parts of North America and northern Europe. They are the size of a large duck or small goose, which they somewhat resemble when swimming, but to which they are completely unrelated.
Pacific loon, Gavia pacifica (A)
Common loon, Gavia immer (A)


== Grebes ==
Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land.
Pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps
Horned grebe, Podiceps auritus (A)
Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena (A)
Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis (A)


== Shearwaters and petrels ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae

The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterised by united nostrils with medium septum and a long outer functional primary.
Bermuda petrel, Pterodroma cahow
Black-capped petrel, Pterodroma hasitata (A)
Cory's shearwater, Calonectris diomedea
Great shearwater, Puffinus gravis
Sooty shearwater, Puffinus griseus
Manx shearwater, Puffinus puffinus
Audubon's shearwater, Puffinus lherminieri (Ex, A)


== Storm petrels ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae
The storm petrels are relatives of the petrels and are the smallest seabirds. They feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. The flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like.
Wilson's storm petrel, Oceanites oceanicus
Leach's storm petrel, Oceanodroma leucorhoa


== Tropicbirds ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Phaethontidae

Tropicbirds are slender white birds of tropical oceans, with exceptionally long central tail feathers. Their heads and long wings have black markings.
White-tailed tropicbird, Phaethon lepturus
Red-billed tropicbird, Phaethon aethereus (A)


== Boobies and gannets ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium to large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish.
Masked booby, Sula dactylatra (A)
Brown booby, Sula leucogaster (A)
Northern gannet, Morus bassanus (A)


== Pelicans ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae
Pelicans are large water birds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. As with other members of the order Pelecaniformes, they have webbed feet with four toes.
American white pelican, Pelecanus erythrorhynchos (A)
Brown pelican, Pelecanus occidentalis (A)


== Cormorants ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Phalacrocoracidae is a family of medium to large coastal, fish-eating seabirds that includes cormorants and shags. Plumage colouration varies, with the majority having mainly dark plumage, some species being black-and-white and a few being colourful.
Double-crested cormorant, Phalacrocorax auritus
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo (A)


== Frigatebirds ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Fregatidae
Frigatebirds are large seabirds usually found over tropical oceans. They are large, black-and-white or completely black, with long wings and deeply forked tails. The males have coloured inflatable throat pouches. They do not swim or walk and cannot take off from a flat surface. Having the largest wingspan-to-body-weight ratio of any bird, they are essentially aerial, able to stay aloft for more than a week.
Magnificent frigatebird, Fregata magnificens (A)


== Bitterns, herons and egrets ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ardeidae

The family Ardeidae contains the bitterns, herons and egrets. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more wary. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills.
American bittern, Botaurus lentiginosus
Least bittern, Ixobrychus exilis
Great blue heron, Ardea herodias
Grey heron, Ardea cinerea (A)
Great egret, Ardea alba
Little egret, Egretta garzetta (A)
Snowy egret, Egretta thula
Little blue heron, Egretta caerulea
Tricoloured heron, Egretta tricolor
Reddish egret, Egretta rufescens (A)
Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis
Green heron, Butorides virescens
Striated heron, Butorides striata (A)
Black-crowned night heron, Nycticorax nycticorax
Yellow-crowned night heron, Nyctanassa violacea
Bermuda night heron, Nyctanassa carcinocatactes(E)


== Ibises ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
Threskiornithidae is a family of large terrestrial and wading birds which includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings with 11 primary and about 20 secondary feathers. They are strong fliers and despite their size and weight, very capable soarers.
White ibis, Eudocimus albus (A)
Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus (A)


== Flamingos ==
Order: Phoenicopteriformes   Family: Phoenicopteridae
Flamingos are gregarious wading birds, usually 3 to 5 feet (0.9 to 1.5 m) tall, found in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres. Flamingos filter-feed on shellfish and algae. Their oddly shaped beaks are specially adapted to separate mud and silt from the food they consume and, uniquely, are used upside-down.
Caribbean flamingo, Phoenicopterus ruber (A)


== New World vultures ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Cathartidae
The New World vultures are not closely related to Old World vultures, but superficially resemble them because of convergent evolution. Like the Old World vultures, they are scavengers. However, unlike Old World vultures, which find carcasses by sight, New World vultures have a good sense of smell with which they locate carrion.
Turkey vulture, Cathartes aura (A)


== Hawks, kites and eagles ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Accipitridae

Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey, which includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight.
Osprey, Pandion haliaetus
Swallow-tailed kite, Elanoides forficatus (A)
Mississippi kite, Ictinia mississippiensis (A)
Bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus (A)
Northern harrier, Circus cyaneus
Sharp-shinned hawk, Accipiter striatus
Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii (A)
Northern goshawk, Accipiter gentilis (A)
Red-tailed hawk, Buteo jamaicensis (A)
Rough-legged hawk, Buteo lagopus (A)
Booted eagle, Hieraaetus pennatus (A)
Bermuda hawk,Bermuteo avivorus(E)


== Falcons ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons.
Eurasian kestrel, Falco tinnunculus (A)
American kestrel, Falco sparverius
Merlin, Falco columbarius
Gyrfalcon, Falco rusticolus (A)
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus


== Rails, crakes, gallinules and coots ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae

Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. Typically they inhabit dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes which are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers.
Yellow rail, Coturnicops noveboracensis (A)
Black rail, Laterallus jamaicensis (A)
Corn crake, Crex crex (A)
Clapper rail, Rallus crepitans (A)
Virginia rail, Rallus limicola (A)
Sora, Porzana carolina
Purple gallinule, Porphyrio martinica
Common gallinule, Gallinula galeata
American coot, Fulica americana


== Cranes ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae
Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances".
Sandhill crane, Grus canadensis (A)


== Plovers and lapwings ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae

The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water.
Northern lapwing, Vanellus vanellus (A)
Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola
American golden plover, Pluvialis dominica
Pacific golden plover, Pluvialis fulva (A)
Wilson's plover, Charadrius wilsonia (A)
Semipalmated plover, Charadrius semipalmatus
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus
Killdeer, Charadrius vociferus
Eurasian dotterel, Charadrius morinellus (A)


== Avocets and stilts ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills.
Black-necked stilt, Himantopus mexicanus (A)
American avocet, Recurvirostra americana (A)


== Sandpipers and allies ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae

Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Variation in length of legs and bills enables multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food.
Spotted sandpiper, Actitis macularia
Solitary sandpiper, Tringa solitaria
Greater yellowlegs, Tringa melanoleuca
Common greenshank, Tringa nebularia (A)
Willet, Tringa semipalmata
Lesser yellowlegs, Tringa flavipes
Wood sandpiper, Tringa glareola (A)
Upland sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda
Eskimo curlew, Numenius borealis (Ex)
Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus
Eurasian curlew, Numenius arquata (A)
Hudsonian godwit, Limosa haemastica (A)
Bar-tailed godwit, Limosa lapponica (A)
Ruddy turnstone, Arenaria interpres
Red knot, Calidris canutus
Sanderling, Calidris alba
Semipalmated sandpiper, Calidris pusilla
Western sandpiper, Calidris mauri
Red-necked stint, Calidris ruficollis (A)
Little stint, Calidris minuta (A)
Least sandpiper, Calidris minutilla
White-rumped sandpiper, Calidris fuscicollis
Baird's sandpiper, Calidris bairdii (A)
Pectoral sandpiper, Calidris melanotos
Sharp-tailed sandpiper, Calidris acuminata (A)
Dunlin, Calidris alpina
Curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea (A)
Stilt sandpiper, Calidris himantopus
Buff-breasted sandpiper, Calidris subruficollis
Ruff, Calidris pugnax (A)
Short-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus griseus
Long-billed dowitcher, Limnodromus scolopaceus
Wilson's snipe, Gallinago delicata
Common snipe Gallinago gallinago (A)
American woodcock, Scolopax minor (A)
Wilson's phalarope, Phalaropus tricolor
Red-necked phalarope, Phalaropus lobatus (A)
Red phalarope, Phalaropus fulicarius (A)


== Gulls, terns and skimmers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae

Laridae is a family of medium to large seabirds and includes gulls, terns and skimmers. They are typically grey or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have webbed feet. Gulls have stout bills while terns have long dagger-like bils.
Laughing gull, Leucophaeus atricilla
Franklin's gull, Leucophaeus pipixcan (A)
Little gull, Hydrocoloeus minutus (A)
Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus
Bonaparte's gull, Chroicocephalus philadelphia
Ring-billed gull, Larus delawarensis
California gull, Larus californicus (A)
Herring gull, Larus argentatus
Iceland gull, Larus glaucoides (A)
Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus
Glaucous gull, Larus hyperboreus (A)
Great black-backed gull, Larus marinus
Sabine's gull, Xema sabini (A)
Black-legged kittiwake, Rissa tridactyla (A)
Brown noddy, Anous stolidus (A)
White tern, Gygis alba (A)
Sooty tern, Onychoprion fuscatus (A)
Bridled tern, Onychoprion anaethetus (A)
Least tern, Sternula antillarum
Large-billed tern, Phaetusa simplex (A)
Gull-billed tern, Gelochelidon nilotica (A)
Caspian tern, Hydroprogne caspia (A)
Black tern, Chlidonias niger
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii (A)
Common tern, Sterna hirundo
Arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea
Forster's tern, Sterna forsteri (A)
Royal tern, Thalasseus maximus
Sandwich tern, Thalasseus sandvicensis (A)
Black skimmer, Rynchops niger (A)


== Skuas and jaegers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae
The family Stercorariidae are, in general, medium to large birds, typically with grey or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They nest on the ground in temperate and arctic regions and are long-distance migrants.
Great skua, Stercorarius skua (A)
South polar skua, Stercorarius maccormicki (A)
Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus
Parasitic jaeger, Stercorarius parasiticus
Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus


== Auks and puffins ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Alcidae
Alcids are superficially similar to penguins due to their black-and-white colours, their upright posture and some of their habits, however they are not related to the penguins and differ in being able to fly. Auks live on the open sea, only deliberately coming ashore to nest.
Dovekie, Alle alle (A)
Atlantic puffin, Fratercula arctica (A)


== Pigeons and doves ==
Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae

Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere.
Rock pigeon, Columba livia (I)
White-winged dove, Zenaida asiatica (A)
Mourning dove, Zenaida macroura
Common ground dove, Columbina passerina


== Cuckoos ==
Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. The Old World cuckoos are brood parasites.
Yellow-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus
Black-billed cuckoo, Coccyzus erythropthalmus


== Barn owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae

Barn owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons.
Barn owl, Tyto alba


== Typical owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae
The typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk.
Snowy owl, Bubo scandiacus (A)
Barred owl, Strix varia (A)
Long-eared owl, Asio otus (A)
Short-eared owl, Asio flammeus (A)
Northern saw-whet owl, Aegolius acadicus (A)
Bermuda saw-whet owl, Aegolius gradyi (E)


== Nightjars ==
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is camouflaged to resemble bark or leaves.
Lesser nighthawk, Chordeiles acutipennis (A)
Common nighthawk, Chordeiles minor
Antillean nighthawk, Chordeiles gundlachii (A)
Eastern whip-poor-will, Antrostomus vociferus (A)


== Swifts ==
Order: Apodiformes   Family: Apodidae
Swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang.
Black swift, Cypseloides niger (A)
Chimney swift, Chaetura pelagica
Common swift, Apus apus (A)


== Hummingbirds ==
Order: Trochiliformes   Family: Trochilidae
Hummingbirds are small birds capable of hovering in mid-air due to the rapid flapping of their wings. They are the only birds that can fly backwards.
Ruby-throated hummingbird, Archilochus colubris (A)


== Kingfishers ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Alcedinidae

Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails.
Belted kingfisher, Megaceryle alcyon


== Woodpeckers and allies ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae
Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks.
Red-headed woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus (A)
Yellow-bellied sapsucker, Sphyrapicus varius
Downy woodpecker, Picoides pubescens (A)
Northern flicker, Colaptes auratus (A)
Bermuda flicker, Colaptes oceanicus (E)


== Tyrant flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Tyrannidae

Tyrant flycatchers are passerine birds which occur throughout North and South America. They superficially resemble the Old World flycatchers, but are more robust and have stronger bills. They do not have the sophisticated vocal capabilities of the songbirds. Most, but not all, have plain colouring. As the name implies, most are insectivorous.
Olive-sided flycatcher, Contopus cooperi (A)
Eastern wood pewee, Contopus virens
Yellow-bellied flycatcher, Empidonax flaviventris (A)
Acadian flycatcher, Empidonax virescens (A)
Alder flycatcher, Empidonax alnorum (A)
Willow flycatcher, Empidonax traillii (A)
Least flycatcher, Empidonax minimus (A)
Eastern phoebe, Sayornis phoebe (A)
Say's phoebe, Sayornis saya (A)
Ash-throated flycatcher, Myiarchus cinerascens (A)
Great crested flycatcher, Myiarchus crinitus (A)
Great kiskadee, Pitangus sulphuratus (I)
Tropical kingbird, Tyrannus melancholicus (A)
Western kingbird, Tyrannus verticalis (A)
Eastern kingbird, Tyrannus tyrannus
Grey kingbird, Tyrannus dominicensis (A)
Scissor-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus forficatus (A)
Fork-tailed flycatcher, Tyrannus savana (A)


== Shrikes ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey.
Loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus (A)
Northern shrike, Lanius excubitor (A)


== Vireos ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vireonidae

The vireos are a group of small to medium-sized passerine birds restricted to the New World. They are typically greenish in colour and resemble wood warblers apart from their heavier bills.
White-eyed vireo, Vireo griseus
Yellow-throated vireo, Vireo flavifrons
Blue-headed vireo, Vireo solitarius (A)
Warbling vireo, Vireo gilvus
Philadelphia vireo, Vireo philadelphicus
Red-eyed vireo, Vireo olivaceus
Black-whiskered vireo, Vireo altiloquus (A)


== Crows and jays ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae

The Corvidae family includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence.
Blue jay, Cyanocitta cristata (A)
American crow, Corvus brachyrhynchos (I)


== Larks ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds.
Eurasian skylark, Alauda arvensis (A)
Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris (A)


== Swallows and martins ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae

The Hirundinidae family is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partially joined at the base.
Purple martin, Progne subis
Caribbean martin, Progne dominicensis (A)
Tree swallow, Tachycineta bicolor
Northern rough-winged swallow, Stelgidopteryx serripennis (A)
Bank swallow, Riparia riparia
Cliff swallow, Petrochelidon pyrrhonota
Cave swallow, Petrochelidon fulva (A)
Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica
Common house martin, Delichon urbicum (A)


== Nuthatches ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae
Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike other birds which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet.
Red-breasted nuthatch, Sitta canadensis (A)
White-breasted nuthatch, Sitta carolinensis (A)


== Treecreepers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae
Treecreepers are small woodland birds, brown above and white below. They have thin pointed down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees.
Brown creeper, Certhia americana (A)


== Wrens ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae
The wrens are mainly small and inconspicuous except for their loud songs. These birds have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous.
House wren, Troglodytes aedon (A)
Winter wren, Troglodytes hiemalis (A)
Marsh wren, Cistothorus palustris (A)


== Kinglets ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae
The kinglets, also called crests, are a small group of birds often included in the Old World warblers, but frequently given family status because they also resemble the titmice.
Golden-crowned kinglet, Regulus satrapa (A)
Ruby-crowned kinglet, Regulus calendula


== Old World flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Old World flycatchers are a large group of small passerine birds native to the Old World. They are mainly small arboreal insectivores. The appearance of these birds is highly varied, but they mostly have weak songs and harsh calls.
Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe (A)
Dark-sided flycatcher, Muscicapa sibirica (A)


== Thrushes and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae

The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs.
Eastern bluebird, Sialia sialis
Veery, Catharus fuscescens (A)
Grey-cheeked thrush, Catharus minimus
Bicknell's thrush, Catharus bicknelli (A)
Swainson's thrush, Catharus ustulatus
Hermit thrush, Catharus guttatus
Wood thrush, Hylocichla mustelina (A)
American robin, Turdus migratorius
Varied thrush, Ixoreus naevius (A)


== Mockingbirds and thrashers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Mimidae

The mimids are a family of passerine birds that includes thrashers, mockingbirds, tremblers and the New World catbirds. These birds are notable for their vocalizations, especially their ability to mimic a wide variety of birds and other sounds heard outdoors. Their colouring tends towards dull-greys and browns.
Grey catbird, Dumetella carolinensis
Northern mockingbird, Mimus polyglottos (A)
Brown thrasher, Toxostoma rufum (A)


== Starlings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae

Starlings are small to medium-sized passerine birds. Their flight is strong and direct and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country. They eat insects and fruit. Plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen.
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris (I)


== Wagtails and pipits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country.
American pipit, Anthus rubescens


== Waxwings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Bombycillidae
The waxwings are a group of passerine birds with soft silky plumage and unique red tips to some of the wing feathers. In the Bohemian and cedar waxwings, these tips look like sealing wax and give the group its name. These are arboreal birds of northern forests. They live on insects in summer and berries in winter.
Bohemian waxwing, Bombycilla garrulus (A)
Cedar waxwing, Bombycilla cedrorum


== Longspurs and snow buntings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae
The Calcariidae are a group of passerine birds that have been traditionally grouped with the Emberizeridae (New World sparrows), but differ in a number of respects and are usually found in open grassy areas.
Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus (A)
Snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis


== New World warblers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Parulidae

The New World warblers are a group of small, often colourful, passerine birds restricted to the New World. Most are arboreal, but some are terrestrial. Most members of this family are insectivores.
Blue-winged warbler, Vermivora cyanoptera
Golden-winged warbler, Vermivora chrysoptera
Tennessee warbler, Oreothlypis peregrina
Orange-crowned warbler, Oreothlypis celata
Nashville warbler, Oreothlypis ruficapilla
Northern parula, Setophaga americana
Yellow warbler, Setophaga petechia
Chestnut-sided warbler, Setophaga pensylvanica
Magnolia warbler, Setophaga magnolia
Cape May warbler, Setophaga tigrina
Black-throated blue warbler, Setophaga caerulescens
Yellow-rumped warbler, Setophaga coronata
Black-throated green warbler, Setophaga virens
Townsend's warbler, Setophaga townsendi (A)
Blackburnian warbler, Setophaga fusca
Yellow-throated warbler, Setophaga dominica
Pine warbler, Setophaga pinus
Kirtland's warbler, Setophaga kirtlandii (A)
Prairie warbler, Setophaga discolor
Palm warbler, Setophaga palmarum
Bay-breasted warbler, Setophaga castanea
Blackpoll warbler, Setophaga striata
Cerulean warbler, Setophaga cerulea (A)
Hooded warbler, Setophaga citrina
American redstart, Setophaga ruticilla
Black-and-white warbler, Mniotilta varia
Prothonotary warbler, Protonotaria citrea
Worm-eating warbler, Helmitheros vermivorus
Swainson's warbler, Limnothlypis swainsonii (A)
Ovenbird, Seiurus aurocapilla
Northern waterthrush, Parkesia noveboracensis
Louisiana waterthrush, Parkesia motacilla
Connecticut warbler, Oporornis agilis
Kentucky warbler, Geothlypis formosus
Mourning warbler, Geothlypis philadelphia
Common yellowthroat, Geothlypis trichas
Wilson's warbler, Cardellina pusilla
Canada warbler, Cardellina canadensis
Yellow-breasted chat, Icteria virens


== American sparrows and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae

The emberizids are a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. In Europe, most species are called buntings. In North America, most of the species in this family are known as sparrows, but these birds are not closely related to the Old World sparrows which are in the family Passeridae. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns.
Chipping sparrow, Spizella passerina
Clay-coloured sparrow, Spizella pallida (A)
Field sparrow, Spizella pusilla (A)
Vesper sparrow, Pooecetes gramineus (A)
Lark sparrow, Chondestes grammacus (A)
Savannah sparrow, Passerculus sandwichensis
Grasshopper sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum (A)
Le Conte's sparrow, Ammodramus lecontii (A)
Saltmarsh sparrow, Ammodramus caudacutus (A)
Fox sparrow, Passerella iliaca (A)
Song sparrow, Melospiza melodia (A)
Lincoln's sparrow, Melospiza lincolnii
Swamp sparrow, Melospiza georgiana (A)
White-throated sparrow, Zonotrichia albicollis
White-crowned sparrow, Zonotrichia leucophrys
Dark-eyed junco, Junco hyemalis


== Cardinals and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cardinalidae

The cardinals are a family of robust, seed-eating birds with strong bills. They are typically associated with open woodland. The sexes usually have distinct plumages.
Northern cardinal, Cardinalis cardinalis (I)
Scarlet tanager, Piranga olivacea
Summer tanager, Piranga rubra
Rose-breasted grosbeak, Pheucticus ludovicianus
Blue grosbeak, Passerina caerulea
Indigo bunting, Passerina cyanea
Painted bunting, Passerina ciris (A)
Dickcissel, Spiza americana


== Troupials and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Icteridae

The icterids are a group of small to medium-sized, often colourful, passerine birds restricted to the New World and include the grackles, New World blackbirds and New World orioles. Most species have black as the predominant plumage colour, often enlivened by yellow, orange or red.
Bobolink, Dolichonyx oryzivorus
Red-winged blackbird, Agelaius phoeniceus (A)
Eastern meadowlark, Sturnella magna (A)
Yellow-headed blackbird, Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus (A)
Rusty blackbird, Euphagus carolinus (A)
Common grackle, Quiscalus quiscula (A)
Brown-headed cowbird, Molothrus ater (A)
Orchard oriole, Icterus spurius (A)
Baltimore oriole, Icterus galbula


== Finches ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae

Finches are seed-eating passerine birds, that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well.
Pine grosbeak, Pinicola enucleator (A)
Purple finch, Haemorhous purpureus (A)
Red crossbill, Loxia curvirostra (A)
White-winged crossbill, Loxia leucoptera (A)
Common redpoll, Acanthis flammea (A)
Pine siskin, Spinus pinus (A)
American goldfinch, Spinus tristis (A)
European goldfinch, Carduelis carduelis (I)
Evening grosbeak, Coccothraustes vespertinus (A)


== Old World sparrows ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae

Sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small, plump, brown or grey birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects.
House sparrow, Passer domesticus (I)


== Waxbills and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Estrildidae
The estrildid finches are small passerine birds of the Old World tropics and Australasia. They are gregarious and often colonial seed eaters with short thick but pointed bills. They are all similar in structure and habits, but have wide variation in plumage colours and patterns.
Orange-cheeked waxbill, Estrilda melpoda (I)
Common waxbill, Estrilda astrild (I)


== See also ==
Flora and fauna of Bermuda
List of birds
Lists of birds by region


== References ==
American Ornithologist's Union. "The A.O.U. Check-list of North American Birds, Seventh Edition". Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. Retrieved 20 August 2007. 
Amos, Eric J. R. (1991). A guide to the Birds of Bermuda. 
Clements, James F. (2000). Birds of the World: a Checklist. Cornell University Press. p. 880. ISBN 0-934797-16-1. 
Dobson, Andrew (2002). A Birdwatching Guide to Bermuda. Arlequin Press, Chelmsford, Essex. 
Dobson, Andrew (2007). "Bermuda Audubon Society". Retrieved 20 August 2007. 
Lepage, Denis. "Checklist of birds of Bermuda". Bird Checklists of the World. Avibase. Retrieved 26 April 2007. 
Raine, André (2002). A Field Guide to the Birds of Bermuda. Macmillan, Oxford.