Limited overs cricket, also known as one-day cricket and in a slightly different context as List A cricket, is a version of the sport of cricket in which a match is generally completed in one day, whereas Test and first-class matches can take up to five days to complete. The name reflects the rule that in the match each team bowls a set maximum number of overs, usually between 20 and 50, although shorter and longer forms of limited overs cricket have been played.
One-day cricket is popular with spectators as it can encourage aggressive, risky, entertaining batting, often results in cliffhanger endings, and ensures that a spectator can watch an entire match without committing to five days of continuous attendance.


== Structure ==
Each team bats only once, and each innings is limited to a set number of overs, usually fifty in a One Day International and between forty and sixty in a List A. List A is a classification of the limited-overs (one-day) form of cricket, technically as the domestic level.
Despite its name, important one-day matches, international and domestic, often have two days set aside, the second day being a "reserve" day to allow more chance of the game being completed if a result is not possible on the first day (for instance if play is prevented or interrupted by rain).


=== Bowling restrictions ===
As mentioned above, in almost all competitive one-day games, a restriction is placed on the number of overs that may be bowled by any one bowler. This is to prevent a side playing two top-class bowlers with extremely good stamina who can bowl throughout their opponents' innings. The usual limitation is set so that a side must include at least five players who bowl. For example, the usual limit for twenty-over cricket is four overs per bowler, for forty-over cricket eight per bowler and for fifty-over cricket ten per bowler. There are exceptions: Pro Cricket in the United States restricts bowlers to five overs each, thus leaving a side requiring only four bowlers.


== History ==
The idea for a one-day, limited 50-over cricket tournament, was first played in the inaugural match of the All India Pooja Cricket Tournament in 1951 in the small town of Tripunithura, Kerala, India. It is thought to be the brain child of KV Kelappan Thampuran, a former cricketer and the first Secretary of the Kerala Cricket Association. The one day limited over cricket game was later adapted and played between English county teams for the first instance on 2 May 1962. Leicestershire beat Derbyshire and Northamptonshire beat Nottinghamshire over 65 overs in the "Midlands Knock-Out Cup", which Northamptonshire went on to win a week later. The following year, the first full-scale one-day competition between first-class teams was played, the knock-out Gillette Cup, won by Sussex. The number of overs was reduced to 60 for the 1964 season. League one-day cricket also began in England, when the John Player Sunday League was started in 1969 with forty over matches. Both these competitions have continued every season since inauguration, though the sponsorship has changed. The knock-out cup is now the Friends Provident Trophy. The league is not exclusive to Sundays, with the competition now over 40 overs after some tinkering in the 1990s. It is now called the Natwest Pro40.
The first Limited Overs International (LOI) or One-Day International (ODI) match was played in Melbourne in 1971, and the quadrennial cricket World Cup began in 1975. Many of the "packaging" innovations, such as coloured clothing, were as a result of World Series Cricket, a "rebel" series set up outside the cricketing establishment by Australian entrepreneur Kerry Packer. For more details, see History of cricket.
Twenty20, a curtailed form of one-day cricket with 20 overs per side, was first played in England in 2003. It has proven very popular, and several Twenty20 matches have been played between national teams. It makes several changes to the usual laws of cricket, including the addition of a "bowl-out" (similar to a penalty shoot-out in football) to decide the result of tied matches, which was subsequently dispensed in favour of a Super Over.


== One Day Internationals ==

One Day International matches are usually played in brightly coloured clothing often in a "day-night" format where the first innings of the day occurs in the afternoon and the second occurs under stadium lights.


=== One Day International tournaments ===
Every four years, the Cricket World Cup involves all the Test-playing nations and other national sides who qualify through the ICC World Cup Qualifier. It usually consists of round-robin stages, followed by semi-finals and a final. The International Cricket Council (ICC) determines the venue far in advance.
The ICC Champions Trophy also involves all the Test-playing nations, and is held between World Cups. It usually consists of a round-robin group stage, semifinals, and a final.
Each Test-playing country often hosts triangular tournaments, between the host nation and two touring sides. There is usually a round-robin group stage, and then the leading two teams play each other in a final, or sometimes a best-of-three final. When there is only one touring side, there is still often a best-of-five or best-of-seven series of limited overs matches.


== Domestic one-day competitions ==
Domestic one-day competitions exist in almost every country where cricket is played.


=== List A status ===
List A cricket is a classification of the limited-overs (one-day) form of the sport of cricket. Much as domestic first-class cricket is the level below international Test match cricket, so List A cricket is the domestic level of one-day cricket below One Day Internationals. Twenty20 matches do not qualify for the present.
Most cricketing nations have some form of domestic List A competition. The number of overs in List A cricket ranges from forty to sixty overs per side.
The Association of Cricket Statisticians and Historians created this category for the purpose of providing an equivalent to first-class cricket, to allow the generation of career records and statistics for comparable one-day matches. Only the more important one-day competitions in each country, plus matches against a touring Test team, are included. The categorisation of cricket matches as "List A" was not officially endorsed by the International Cricket Council until 2006, when the ICC announced that it and its member associations would be determining this classification in a manner similar to that done for first class matches.
Matches that qualify as List A:
One Day Internationals (ODIs)
Other international matches
Premier one-day tournaments in each country
Official matches of a touring Test team against main first-class teams

Matches that do not qualify as List A:
World Cup warm-up matches
Other Tourist matches (for example, against first-class teams that are not part of the main domestic first-class competition, such as universities)
Festival and friendly matches


=== Australia ===

The Ryobi One Day Cup is a 50 overs tournament held since 1969. The sides that compete are the following:
New South Wales Blues, representing New South Wales
Victorian Bushrangers, representing Victoria
Southern Redbacks, representing South Australia
Tasmanian Tigers, representing Tasmania
Queensland Bulls, representing Queensland
Western Warriors, representing Western Australia
In 2006 Cricket Australia introduced the KFC Twenty20 Big Bash which was amongst the state teams (as above). In 2011 this was expanded to the KFC Twenty20 Big Bash League, consisting of teams based in the capital cities of Australia. The teams are as follows:
Adelaide Strikers
Brisbane Heat
Hobart Hurricanes
Melbourne Renegades (based at Etihad Stadium)
Melbourne Stars (based at the MCG)
Perth Scorchers
Sydney Sixers (based at the SCG)
Sydney Thunder (based at ANZ Stadium)


=== Bangladesh ===
The National One Day Cricket League is sponsored by Mirzapore Tea. It currently runs from November to March, with each team playing the other home and away once in a round-robin format. These six teams compete for the League title:


=== England ===
The Royal London One-Day Cup is a fifty-over limited overs cricket competition for the English first-class counties. It replaces the ECB 40 from 2014 onwards, increasing the number of overs from 40 to 50 in order to bring the competition in line with One Day Internationals. The competition consists of two groups of nine teams, from which the top four teams from each group progress to the quarter-finals. Lord's will host the inaugural final of the competition on Saturday 20 September 2014. Unlike in the previous competition neither the national teams of Scotland or the Netherlands, nor the Unicorns cricket team—a team formed of players who do not have first-class contracts—will participate in the competition. One-Day Cup games have List A status.
The NatWest t20 Blast is a Twenty20 cricket league in England and Wales run by the ECB since 2014. The league consists of the 18 first-class county teams divided into two divisions of nine teams each, the top four teams from each group entering the knockout stage. The inaugural tournament was won by Birmingham Bears. This tournament replaced the Friends Life t20 as the premier domestic Twenty20 competition of England and Wales.


=== India ===
Ranji Trophy onedays – The teams in the five zones play each other and the zonal winners play in a round-robin format.
Deodhar Trophy – Played amongst the five zones: East Zone, West Zone, North Zone, South Zone and Central Zone
NKP Salve Challenger Trophy – Three teams are involved – each team comprising a motley of players picked from across the country. The three teams are named India seniors, India A and India B or India Reds, India Greens and India Blues.
Indian Cricket League – A Twenty20 league bankrolled by billionaire Subhash Chandra and run independently of the country's governing body, the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI). Launched in 2007 with teams in Mumbai, Chennai, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Delhi. It was closed down in 2009.
Indian Premier League – The BCCI's response to the Indian Cricket League, this Twenty20 league launched in 2008 with teams in Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kolkata and Mohali. The league is explicitly designed to operate on a North American model of privately owned franchises. [There have since been a few changes to the line-up, with the addition of teams from Pune and Kochi (KTK played for only one season); and the replacement of Deccan Chargers with Sunrisers Hyderabad in Hyderabad.]


=== New Zealand ===
Men's: The State Shield (formerly the Shell Cup) – played annually between six teams based upon the first class associations: The Northern Knights, Auckland Aces, Central Stags, Wellington Firebirds, Canterbury Wizards and Otago Volts. Currently played as a double round-robin (home and away) with team 1 gaining direct entry to the final and teams 2 and 3 contesting a semi-final. Games played to ODI rules with many day-night matches. The winners in the 2008–09 season were the Northern Districts Knights.
Women's: The State League – played annually between six teams based upon the first-class associations: Northern Spirit, Auckland Hearts, Central Hinds, Wellington Blaze, Canterbury Magicians, Otago Sparks. The format is a double-round-robin with the winner determined by points. The winners in the 2003–04 season were the Canterbury Magicians.


=== Pakistan ===
The Pakistani domestic competition changes regularly, but for 2005–06 there are plans for three one-day tournaments for men:
NATIONAL BANK Cup: A two-week tournament in February and March between city teams, divided into the Gold League (with seven teams) and Silver League (with six teams). The teams play each other once, with the top two teams qualifying for the final in each individual League, so no team from the Gold League will meet a Silver League team.
Gold League teams:

Silver League teams:

NATIONAL BANK Patron's Cup: A two-week tournament running just before the NATIONAL BANK Cup, with one group of five teams and another group of six teams. The top two teams from each group proceed to the semi-final. The teams that compete are:

NATIONAL BANK Twenty20 Cup: A tournament running one week in mid-March. The same groups apply as in the NATIONAL BANK Cup, and there will be two semi-finals and a final following the group stages. The tournament will be held in Karachi and Lahore.


=== South Africa ===
The local competition in South Africa is the Standard Bank Cup (formerly Benson & Hedges Series) played between 6 teams:

The games are 45-overs, and based on a home-and-away round-robin match system (each team plays ten matches) with semi-finals and a final. The Eagles were the winners of the 2004/2005 and 2005/2006 competitions.


=== Sri Lanka ===
20 teams compete in the Premier Limited-Overs Tournament, which is an expansion from 16 in the last season. Games are played over 50 overs per side, and the teams are divided into two groups, where each team meets the other once over a period of a month. The four top teams from each group qualify for the quarter-finals, and there is then a direct knock-out system until a winner is found after three knock-out stages. The competing teams are:


=== West Indies ===

The KFC Cup is the main regional one-day competition in the West Indies, named after its chief sponsor, the fast food chain KFC. In recent years, it has been run over a week's time as a group stage followed by knock-out stages. Guyana are the current holders, after they beat Barbados in the final, and they are also the team to have won it most, with nine titles, although two of them have been shared. Trinidad and Tobago are second in that history, having won seven titles.
In the 2005–06 edition of the KFC Cup, the six permanent first class regions of the West Indies contested the tournament:
 Barbados
 Guyana
 Jamaica
Leeward Islands
 Trinidad and Tobago
Windward Islands


== One-day records ==

The world record for the highest innings total in any List A limited overs match is 496 for 4 by Surrey against Gloucestershire in their Friends Provident Trophy 50-overs match at the Oval, London on 29 April 2007. That surpassed the 443 for nine by Sri Lanka against the Netherlands in their One Day International 50-overs match at Amstelveen on 4 July 2006, which is currently the highest ODI score. The lowest ever total is 23 by Yorkshire against Middlesex at Headingley in 1974 in a 40-overs match.
The most runs scored by both sides in any List A limited overs match is 872: Australia, batting first, scored 434 for four in 50 overs, and yet were beaten by South Africa who scored 438 for nine with a ball to spare during their One Day International at Johannesburg in 2006.
The highest individual innings is 268 by Ali Brown for Surrey against Glamorgan in a 50-overs match at The Oval in 2002. The best bowling figures are eight for 15 by Rahul Sanghvi for Delhi against Himachal Pradesh in a 50-overs match at Una in 1997. The highest international individual innings is by Rohit Sharma who scored 264. The highest score in any formal limited overs match is believed to be United's 630 for five against Bay Area in a 45 overs match at Richmond, California in August 2006.
The most runs in an over was scored by Herschelle Gibbs of the South African cricket team when, in the 2007 Cricket World Cup in the West Indies, he hit 6 sixes in one over bowled by Daan van Bunge of the Netherlands.
This record is shared by Yuvraj Singh of India who achieved this feat in the 2007 ICC World Twenty20 in South Africa, he hit 6 sixes in an over bowled by Stuart Broad of England.
Sachin Tendulkar holds the record of being the first male cricketer to score a double century in ODIs (200 not out). He achieved this feat against South Africa on 24 February 2010, at Gwalior, India. Virender Sehwag is the second male cricketer to score a double century, when he scored 219 before being caught out against West Indies on 8 December 2011, at Indore, India. Rohit Sharma became the third male cricketer to score a double century,when he scored 264 against Sri Lanka on 13 November 2014.


== See also ==
Cricket


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
List A records at CricketArchive
Cricket Blog
Interesting Cricket Stats comments on cricket stats, last updated January 2009
Official ECB website
Online Cricket News Updates
Sight Screen – Cricket Discussions
The "Silly Point" |||. Live cricket scorecards and text commentary
Twenty 20 Cricket
Twenty20 World Championship News, Live Scores, Animated Replays and more
PTV Sports
Live Cricket Score