In geology, a placer deposit or placer is an accumulation of valuable minerals formed by gravity separation during sedimentary processes. The name is from the Spanish word placer, meaning "alluvial sand". Placer mining is an important source of gold, and was the main technique used in the early years of many gold rushes, including the California Gold Rush. Types of placer deposits include alluvium, eluvium, beach placers, and paleoplacers.
Placer materials must be both dense and resistant to weathering processes. To accumulate in placers, mineral particles must be significantly denser than quartz (whose specific gravity is 2.65), as quartz is usually the largest component of sand or gravel. Placer environments typically contain black sand, a conspicuous shiny black mixture of iron oxides, mostly magnetite with variable amounts of ilmenite and hematite. Valuable mineral components often occurring with black sands are monazite, rutile, zircon, chromite, wolframite, and cassiterite.


== Substances minedEdit ==
Substances commercially mined from placer deposits include:
Diamonds
Gold
Garnet
Iron, from ironsands containing high concentrations of magnetite
Platinum group metals
Quartz Monazite Sands
Rare earth elements, from the mineral monazite
Ruby
Sapphire
Thorium, from the mineral monazite
Tin, in the mineral cassiterite
Titanium, from the minerals ilmenite and rutile
Uranium, from Precambrian paleoplacers
Zirconium, from the mineral zircon


== Alluvial placersEdit ==

Alluvial placers are those formed in river or stream sediments. Typical locations for alluvial gold placer deposits are on the inside bends of rivers and creeks; in natural hollows; at the break of slope on a stream; the base of an escarpment, waterfall or other barrier.
Alluvial placers are formed by the deposition of dense particles at a site where water velocity remains below that required to transport them further.
To form a placer deposit, the particles desired must show a marked density contrast with the gangue material, which is able to be transported away from the trap site. Only if the deposit is winnowed in this way can the minerals be concentrated to economic levels.


== Beach placersEdit ==

Beach placers are formed in sand and gravel deposited along the edge of large bodies of water.


== See alsoEdit ==

Heavy mineral sands ore deposits
Black sand
Placer mining
Sedimentology


== External linksEdit ==