Paddling with regard to watercraft is the act of manually propelling a boat using a paddle. The paddle, which consists of one or two blades joined to a shaft, is also used to steer the vessel. The paddle is not connected to the boat (unlike in rowing where the oar is connected to the boat).


== CanoeingEdit ==

Canoeing is the activity of paddling a canoe for leisure, navigation or exploration. In America the term refers exclusively to using one or more single blades or paddles to propel a canoe. In the United Kingdom and some other countries in Europe however, canoeing is also used to refer to kayaking and Canadian canoeing is used then to distinguish canoeing from kayaking.
There are sub-varieties of canoeing, such as touring and whitewater or wildwater canoeing, outrigger canoeing, etcetera. Travelling whitewater in a whitewater raft can involve using either paddles, or a pair of oars, or both.
Outrigger canoe racing is a team paddling sport which uses the outrigger canoe.
In his lifetime, according to the Guinness Book of World Records Verlen Kruger paddled the most miles (over 100,000 miles) of anyone in the sport.


== KayakingEdit ==

Kayaking is the use of a kayak for moving across water. Kayaking is differentiated from canoeing by the fact that a kayak has a closed cockpit and kayakers use a double bladed paddle and sit in a seat on the bottom of the boat with their legs extended out in front of them. Canoeists will either sit on an elevated bench seat or kneel directly on the bottom of the boat with two knees or one knee in the "high kneel" posture.


== Dragon boatingEdit ==

A dragon boat is a long and narrow human powered boat used in the team paddling sport of dragon boat racing which originated in China.
For racing events, dragon boats are not rigged with full decorative Chinese dragon heads and tails and are not required to carry a large drum aboard. The decorative boats are used in ceremonial events. They do howevever use smaller and lighter dragon heads and tails and drum for racing. They are not normally used during practice.


== RaftingEdit ==

Rafting or whitewater rafting uses a raft to navigate a river or other bodies of water. This is usually done on whitewater or different degrees of rough water, in order to thrill and excite the raft passengers. The development of this activity as a leisure sport has become popular since the mid-1970s.


== Surf skiing and paddleboardingEdit ==

SUPs, stand-up paddleboards, are steered with a singled bladed paddle and normally used to surf waves in ocean and rivers as well as navigating easy rivers. Another facet of the sport involves a sit-on-top kayak-paddleboard and using a double-blade paddle to negotiate surf and more tranquil waters.


== NotesEdit ==