A wildflower (or wild flower) is a flower that grows in the wild, meaning it was not intentionally seeded or planted. Yet "wildflower" meadows of a few mixed species are sold in seed packets. The term implies that the plant probably is neither a hybrid nor a selected cultivar that is in any way different from the way it appears in the wild as a native plant, even if it is growing where it would not naturally. The term can refer to the flowering plant as a whole, even when not in bloom, and not just the flower.
"Wildflower" is not an exact term. Terms like native species (naturally occurring in the area, see flora), exotic or, better, introduced species (not naturally occurring in the area), of which some are labelled invasive species (that out-compete other plants – whether native or not), imported (introduced to an area whether deliberately or accidentally) and naturalized (introduced to an area, but now considered by the public as native) are much more accurate.
In the United Kingdom, the organisation Plantlife International instituted the "County Flowers scheme" in 2002, for which members of the public nominated and voted for a wild flower emblem for their county. The aim was to spread awareness of the heritage of native species and about the need for conservation, as some of these species are endangered. For example, Somerset has adopted the Cheddar Pink (Dianthus gratianopolitanus), London the Rosebay Willowherb (Chamerion angustifolium) and Denbighshire/Sir Ddinbych in Wales the rare Limestone Woundwort (Stachys alpina).


== Examples ==
Adonis aestivalis - summer pheasant's-eye
Anthemis arvensis
Anagallis
Agrostemma githago
Centaurea cyanus
Coreopsis tinctoria
Dianthus barbatus
Digitalis purpurea
Eschscholzia californica - California Poppy
Gypsophila elegans
Glebionis segetum
Papaver rhoeas
Silene latifolia
Viola tricolor


== See also ==
List of San Francisco Bay Area wildflowers
Megaherbs
Native plant
Naturalisation
Spring ephemeral
Wildflowers of the Canadian Rocky Mountains
Wildflowers of the Great Smoky Mountains
North American Native Plant Society, formerly the Canadian Wildflower Society


== References ==
^ "http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/wildflower". Retrieved December 5, 2014. Wildflower, noun. Any flowering plant that grows without intentional human aid. 
^ Pauline Pears (2005), HDRA encyclopedia of organic gardening, Dorling Kindersley, ISBN 978-1405308915 


== External links ==
 Media related to Wild flowers at Wikimedia Commons
Wildflower Magazine promotes the use and conservation of wildflowers and native plants, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. Formerly published by the North American Native Plant Society
Plantlife, UK organisation
Wildflower in Cyprus Information on 1250 native plant species to North Cyprus.
Ontario Wildflowers Detailed information about wildflowers of Ontario (Canada) and Northeastern North America
Western USA wildflower reports
NPIN: Native Plant Database
Native Plant Database from the North American Native Plant Society