Diamondback Bicycles is a major bicycle brand that is based in Kent, Washington. Diamondbacks are sold in many countries, including the United States, Australia, Canada, Bangladesh and the United Kingdom. Produced by Kinesis Industry in China, most Diamondbacks are considered to be low to mid-priced bicycles, though some of their models are on the high end. The Diamondback division is currently owned by the Dutch corporation Accell.


== HistoryEdit ==
Diamondback Bicycles was founded as a BMX brand in 1977 by Western States Imports in Newbury Park, California, which sold bikes under the Centurion (bicycle) brand. Early in its history, the brand name was "Diamond Back" and over time this changed to "DiamondBack" and then to "Diamondback." Beginning in 1990, Western States Imports started selling its mountain bikes and road bicycles under the Diamondback name as well. Since 1979, many riders have successfully competed under the sponsorship of Diamondback, which began with BMX and expanded to Mountain Bikes with the creation of Diamondback Racing (DBR) in 1993. In 1999, Diamondback Bicycles was purchased by the Derby Cycle Corporation, which also owned the Raleigh Bicycle Company, and merged Raleigh and Diamondback together. In 2001, Derby Cycle Corporation sold Raleigh and Diamondback, and currently both brands continue to share the same owners. Diamondback is a partner with several advocacy groups which includes the Evergreen Mountain Bike Alliance, the Cascade Bicycle Club, Bikes Belong, and the International Mountain Bike Association.


== ModelsEdit ==
One of the innovations pioneered by Diamondback is the Knuckle Box suspension, which is found on its Sortie, Mission, and Scapegoat full suspension mountain bikes. In addition, Diamondback has its own fitness line which includes a variety of exercise equipment such as ellipticals, recumbents, uprights, and indoor cycles. A number of different models and sizes are offered by the brand, which include the following:

Full Suspension
Mountain Hardtail
Road
Performance Hybrid
Hybrid
Dual Sport
Comfort
Cruiser
Women's
Youth
BMX


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Diamondback U.S.A. official site
Diamondback Australia official site
Diamondback U.K. official site
Diamondback Fitness official site