Social behaviors are, at a minimum, interactions among two or more organisms typically from the same species. Social behavior is exhibited by a wide range of organisms including social bacteria, Cellular slime moulds, social insects, social shrimp, Naked mole-rats, and humans.


== In sociologyEdit ==
Sociology is the scientific or academic study of social behavior, including its origins, development, organization, and institutions.
In sociology, social behaviour is emphasised towards society.
Research has shown that different animals, including humans, share the similar types of social behaviour such as aggression and bonding. This can also be the same with species with a primitive brain such as ants. Even though humans and animals share some aspects of social behaviour with species such as ants, human social behaviour is much more complicated.


== In psychologyEdit ==

Social psychology is the scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others. In psychology, social behaviour is referred to human behaviour. It covers behaviours ranging from physical to emotional that we communicate in and also the way we are influenced by ethics, attitudes, genetics and culture etc.


== TypesEdit ==
The types of social behaviour include the following:


=== Aggressive behaviourEdit ===
Violent and bullying behaviour are two types of aggressive behaviour, their outcomes are extremely similar. These outcomes include affiliation, gaining attention, power and control. Aggressive behaviour is a type of social behaviour that can potentially cause or threaten physical or emotional harm. People who suffer from aggressive behaviour are most likely to be irritable, impulsive and restless hence why this type of behaviour can range from verbal abuse to damaging victim property. Although, an outburst of aggression is highly common. Aggressive behaviour on the other hand is always deliberate, and occurs either habitually or in a pattern. The one way to handle aggressive behaviour is to understand what the cause is, Below is what can influence aggressive behaviour:

Family structure
Relationships
Work or school environment
Health conditions
Psychiatric issues
Life issues


==== Why are children so aggressive?Edit ====
Poor parenting skills is one of the most common reasons why children are aggressive. Biological factors and lack of relationship skills are a couple to name. As children grow up, in many cases they tend to imitate behaviour from their elders such as violence or aggression. Aggressive behaviour can be irratating, and to stop a child from doing such, they receive attention for it from their parents, teachers or peers. However, there can be times where parents aren't aware of when such behaviour is occurring and unknowingly reward it; they are encouraging the child. Aggressive behaviour can lead onto bipolar disorders.


==== Why are adults so aggressive?Edit ====
Adults can also suffer from aggressive behaviour, these can develop over time, from undesirable life experiences or an illness. Disorders such as depression, anxiety or post traumatic stress disorder tend to have aggressive behaviour but this is unintentionally exposed. However, those without any recent underlying medical or emotional disorder, frustration is the answer to their aggressive behaviour. Emotional behaviour can also trigger aggression when someone stops caring about others.


=== Violent behaviourEdit ===

An individual that threatens or physically harms another individual is classified as violent behaviour. Violent behaviour usually starts of with verbal abuse but then escalates to physical harm such as hitting or hurting.


==== Why are children so violent?Edit ====
Violence is learned behaviour, just like aggressive behaviour, children imitate what they see from their elders hence why it is necessary to help your children understand that violence is not the best way to resolve conflict. You can always set a good example by resolving conflict in a calm manner. Violence such as spanking, pinching, shoving or even chocking etc, should never be used to discipline your child.
There are many reasons to what triggers violence abuse, these include the following:

Childhood abuse
History of violent behaviour
Use of drugs such as Cocaine
History of arrests
Mental health problems, bipolar disorder
Presence of firearms in the household
Generic factors
Brain damage from accident
Exposure to violence in media
Socioeconomic factors such as poverty, single parenting, martial breakups, unemployment etc.
Violent behaviour is similar to aggressive behaviour, it is either habitually or occurs in a pattern. The concept for violent behaviour is very simple, at first there is tension and conflict. This is then followed by either destruction of the individuals properties and then abuse. This pattern gets worse overtime hence why it is best to recognise the pattern as it may prevent violence from happening another.


== Behavioural and developmental disordersEdit ==
Expressive Language Disorder, this is a condition where the child/adult has an issue with expressing itself in speech.
Seizure Disorder, this is a neurological disorder that can possibly cause spasms minor physical signs or several symptoms combined that cannot be controlled by the brain.
Down Syndrome, this is a chromosomal abnormality condition that changes over the course of development.
Attention Deficit Disorder, this is a common neurobehavioral disorder that has problems with over-activity, impulsivity, inattentiveness or possibly even a combination.
Bipolar Disorder, this is a form of mood disorder characterised by a variation of moods that can change within minutes.
Autism Spectrum Disorder, this is a condition that affects social interaction, interests, behaviour and communication.
Cerebral Palsy, this is a condition caused by the brain that activates shortly after birth. It affects movement, abnormal speech, hearing and visual impairments and mental retardation.


== See alsoEdit ==
Social science


== ReferencesEdit ==