A biological membrane or biomembrane is an enclosing or separating membrane that acts as a selectively permeable barrier within living things. Biological membranes, in the form of cell membranes, often consist of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded, integral and peripheral proteins used in communication and transportation of chemicals and ions. Bulk lipid in membrane provides a fluid matrix for proteins to rotate and laterally diffuse for physiological functioning. Proteins are adapted to high membrane fluidity environment of lipid bilayer with the presence of an annular lipid shell, consisting of lipid molecules bound tightly to surface of integral membrane proteins. The cellular membranes should not be confused with isolating tissues formed by layers of cells, such as mucous membranes and basement membranes.


== Function ==
The phospholipid bilayer contains charged hydrophilic headgroups, which interact with polar water. The lipids also contain hydrophobic tails, which meet with the hydrophobic tails of the complementary layer. The interactions of lipids, especially the hydrophobic tails, determine the lipid bilayer physical properties such as fluidity.
The phospholipid bilayer is formed due to formation of aggregate in aqueous solutions. Aggregating is caused by the hydrophobic effect, where hydrophobic ends are kept away from water and hydrophilic ends are in contact with it. This creates a favorable molecular arrangement by reducing unfavorable contact between hydrophobic tails and water and increasing hydrogen bonding between the hydrophilic heads and water.
Membranes in cells typically define enclosed spaces or compartments in which cells may maintain a chemical or biochemical environment that differs from the outside. For example, the membrane around peroxisomes shields the rest of the cell from peroxides, chemicals that can be toxic to the cell, and the cell membrane separates a cell from its surrounding medium. Peroxisomes are one form of vacuole found in the cell that contain by-products of chemical reactions within the cell. Most organelles are defined by such membranes, and are called "membrane-bound" organelles.


=== Selective Permeability ===
Probably the most important feature of a biomembrane is that it is a selectively permeable structure. This means that the size, charge, and other chemical properties of the atoms and molecules attempting to cross it will determine whether they succeed in doing so. Selective permeability is essential for effective separation of a cell or organelle from its surroundings. Biological membranes also have certain mechanical or elastic properties that allow them to change shape and move as required.
Generally, small hydrophobic molecules can readily cross phospholipid bilayers by simple diffusion.
Particles that are required for cellular function but are unable to diffuse freely across a membrane enter through a membrane transport protein or are taken in by means of endocytosis, where the membrane allows for a vacuole to join onto it and push its contents into the cell. Many types of specialized plasma membranes can separate cell from external environment: apical, basolateral, presynaptic and postsynaptic ones, membranes of flagella, cilia, microvillus, filopodia and lamellipodia, the sarcolemma of muscle cells, as well as specialized myelin and dendritic spine membranes of neurons. Plasma membranes can also form different types of "supramembrane" structures such as caveola, postsynaptic density, podosome, invadopodium, desmosome, hemidesmosome, focal adhesion, and cell junctions. These types of membranes differ in lipid and protein composition.
Distinct types of membranes also create intracellular organelles: endosome; smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum; sarcoplasmic reticulum; Golgi apparatus; lysosome; mitochondrion (inner and outer membranes); nucleus (inner and outer membranes); peroxisome; vacuole; cytoplasmic granules; cell vesicles (phagosome, autophagosome, clathrin-coated vesicles, COPI-coated and COPII-coated vesicles) and secretory vesicles (including synaptosome, acrosomes, melanosomes, and chromaffin granules). Different types of biological membranes have diverse lipid and protein compositions. The content of membranes defines their physical and biological properties. Some components of membranes play a key role in medicine, such as the efflux pumps that pump drugs out of a cell.


== Composition ==
=== Asymmetry === The components of bilayers are distributed unequally between the two surfaces to create asymmetry between the outer and inner surfaces of the phospholipid bilayer. The asymmetric nature between the leaflets of membranes was determined by using phospholipase, which does not pass through membranes and, thus, only rests on the outer leaflet of cells.


=== Proteins ===
Phospholipid bilayers contain different proteins. These membrane proteins have various functions and characteristics. Integral proteins hold strong association with the lipid bilayer and cannot easily become detached. They will dissociate only with chemical treatment that breaks the membrane. Integral proteins are often associated with the inner membrane of the bilayer. Peripheral proteins are unlike integral proteins in that they hold weak interactions with the surface of the bilayer and can easily become dissociated from the membrane.


== See also ==
Membrane lipids
Membrane protein
Annular lipid shell
Lipid bilayer
Membrane fluidity
Osmosis
Membrane biology
Membrane models


== References ==

General


== External links ==
Membranes at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)