The Pokémon (ポケモン, Pokemon) franchise has 721 (as of the release of Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire) distinctive fictional species classified as the titular Pokémon. This is a selected listing of major amount of the Pokémon species, originally found in the Diamond and Pearl versions, arranged as they are in the main game series' National Pokédex.


== Turtwig ==
Turtwig, Naetle (ナエトル, Naetoru) in original Japanese language versions, are small, turtle-like Pokémon, and are one of the three starter Pokémon for the Sinnoh region. Its prominent jawbone may denote a relationship to the snapping turtle. Its name refers to a turtle and a twig. Its green, brown and yellow body is covered by a shell. A small sapling grows on its head, similar to the plant bulb on Bulbasaur's back and the leaf on Chikorita's head. The soil-based shell on its back grows stronger when it absorbs water and nutrients. On a very healthy Turtwig, the shell should feel moist. Turtwig survives by carrying out photosynthesis with its whole body. The leaf on its head will wilt if it becomes thirsty. As a result, it lives in areas that are close to lakes.
Turtwig makes its first Pokémon anime appearance in the first episode of the Diamond and Pearl series, where it is shown as one of the three Sinnoh starter Pokémon in Professor Rowan's lab. Ash caught a Turtwig that had been living in a forest breaking up fights among wild Pokémon in the area. After an encounter with Team Rocket, Ash and his friends began to leave, and the Turtwig ran to challenge him. Turtwig and Pikachu battled, and Ash caught Turtwig. Turtwig has taken part in three of Ash's Gym battles. It defeated Roark's Cranidos in their first battle, and in the rematch, defeated the newly evolved Rampardos, giving Ash his first Sinnoh badge. It also battled against Gardenia's Turtwig during his second gym battle. Although Gardenia's Pokémon had defeated Ash's during a battle in the Eterna Forest, he gained the upper hand and defeated the Grass-type. After learning Energy Ball from Kenny's Breloom, Turtwig didn't battle again until the Pastoria Gym battle, where it battled Crasher Wake's Quagsire but it was called back before being defeated.
In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Diamond owns a Turtwig named "Chims", that is first seen when Platinum lets him out of his Poké Ball and gives him the pokédex for her bodyguards and instructs him to give it to one of the bodyguards. Matching the description, Tru chooses Diamond as its trainer and gives him the Pokédex. Right after that, a flock of Starly appear and begin attacking the group, which results in the three starters fighting and defeating them. When Tru and the other starters are training in Eterna City for Platinum's Gym Battle with Gardenia, Cynthia walks past them and notices that the three Pokémon are about to evolve. It later evolves into a Torterra along with Pearl's Chimchar, "Chimhiko" at Veilstone City.


== Grotle ==
Grotle, Hayashigame (ハヤシガメ) in original Japanese language versions, is the evolution of Turtwig. Its name is probably from growth and turtle. Grotle lives alongside water in forests. During the daytime, it leaves the forests to let the trees on its shell take in sunlight. Its shell is also strengthened by soil. Some Pokémon come to peck the berries growing on the trees on its back. It knows where pure water wells up. It carries fellow Pokémon there on its back. Very slow and gentle, they only battle when needed, and in battle they will fight valiantly for the trainer.
In the Pokémon anime, Ash's Turtwig evolved to Grotle, whose heavier size gave it a big disadvantage until Paul's Torterra taught it how to cope with its reduced speed.


== Torterra ==
Torterra, Dodaitos (ドダイトス, Dodaitosu) in original Japanese language versions, is the final evolution of the Turtwig evolutionary line, It evolves from Grotle. It most likely resembles a Galápagos tortoise. It name is derived from tortoise and terra (meaning earth), though its name may also come from the Toraton of the mockumentary The Future is Wild. Despite their great size, these Pokémon are peaceful in nature. When immobile, they look as if they are part of the ground upon which they rest, not as though they are a sleeping Pokémon. Because of this appearance, there are occasions when small Pokémon will gather on the shell of a stationary Torterra. Some Pokémon are born on a Torterra's back and spend their entire life there. When Torterra do move, they often move in herds in search of water. Ancient people imagined that beneath the ground, a gigantic Torterra dwelled.
Torterra appeared in Pokémon: The Rise of Darkrai belonging to a Trainer named Maury, where it battled against Ash's Pikachu. Its first Anime appearance was when Torterra, Paul's starter Pokémon, later helped Ash's Grotle cope with its reduced Speed after evolving into a much heavier Pokémon. Ash's Grotle evolved into Torterra during a battle with Team Rocket, learning Leaf Storm in the process.


== Chimchar ==
Chimchar, Hikozaru (ヒコザル) in original Japanese language versions, is a small chimpanzee-based primate with orange fur, a swirl-like symbol on the chest and a flame for a tail. It is the Fire-type starter for the Sinnoh region. Being very agile, Chimchar are able to climb the rocky ledges of tall mountains, where they live. The flames on their rears are produced by burning gas in their stomachs. The flames do not go out in the rain, and unlike the tail flames of Charmander, those of Chimchar go out when they go to sleep unlike its later evolution Infernape.
Chimchar makes its first Pokémon anime appearance in the first episode of the Diamond and Pearl series, "Following a Maiden Voyage!", where it is shown as one of the three Sinnoh starter Pokémon in Professor Rowan's lab. Paul, one of the rivals of Ash in the series, has a Chimchar he found in the wild. Paul later abandons Chimchar after a poor showing in a battle, and Ash asks it if it wants to join his team. Chimchar accepts.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness Chimchar is available as a playable character and can be selected as a partner. In the Pokémon Sunday program aired on TV Tokyo, one of the current costumed characters that serves as a co-host is a female Chimchar.


== Monferno ==
Monferno, Moukazaru (モウカザル) in original Japanese language versions, is the evolution of Chimchar. Much of Monferno's hair is a bright orange color. It has blue and red markings on its face and has white hair around its neck and gold arm bands, It most likely resembles a baboon. Monferno now has an evident tail, unlike its previous form. Its tail is similar to that of Charmander who has a flame at the tip. Monferno's flame is often used as a weapon. When threatened, it increases the size of its flame in order to appear larger than it really is, which is useful in scaring off attacking foes. It skillfully controls the intensity of the fire on its tail to keep its foes at an ideal distance. Monferno can climb onto walls to shoot aerial attacks. A bigger fire on its tail and a brighter blue pattern on its face means its rank in its pack is higher.
Monferno was seen in the anime, where it was trained by Angie of the Pokémon Summer Academy. Ash's Chimchar evolves into Monferno during a long awaited 6 on 6 battle with Paul.


== Infernape ==
Infernape (ゴウカザル, Goukazaru) is the final evolution of Chimchar. Its body is a brownish-red color and a large flame burns on its head. Its crown of fire is indicative of its fiery nature and never goes out, unlike those of its pre-evolutions Chimchar and Monferno. The tail flame it had as its pre-evolutions has disappeared. Infernape now wears a gold chest ring in place of a chest plate. Its hands, feet, and inner ears are all blue. It also has gold shoulder pads, knee pads, and wrist bands. The blue and red markings it had on its forehead as a Monferno have now changed to a deep blood-red color. Infernape uses a special kind of martial arts that utilizes all four of its limbs. It uses them to pull off special combat moves. It is most competitive when it comes to speed. It tosses its enemies around with agility. It uses all its limbs to fight in its own unique style.
Infernape made an appearance in the movie The Rise of Darkrai. It battled against Brock's Croagunk, and alongside Torterra and Empoleon to stop the consequences of Dialga and Palkia's battle. Ash's Infernape made its debut in DP163. Elite Four Flint's Infernape made its debut in DP165 where it battled Ash's Buizel, Infernape, and Pikachu. Flint's Infernape also appeared in DP180 where it battled Olivine City's gym leader Jasmine's Steelix quickly knocking it out with a powerful Flare Blitz.
In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine, Infernape was voted as the best Fire-type Pokémon. They stated that it "looks like king monkey with its gold chest rings, shoulder pads, knee pads, and wrist bands. It's got more bling than a darts champion."


== Piplup ==
Piplup, Pocchama (ポッチャマ, Potchama) in original Japanese language versions, is one of the three species of Pokémon players can choose from at the beginning of their adventure in the Diamond and Pearl versions of the series.
Characterized as a blue penguin, it has yellow feet and a light-blue body. There are two white spots on its chest that seem to resemble buttons on a suit. Piplup have a layer of fine down covering their bodies that protects them from frigid waters as well as hot temperatures. It lives along shores in northern countries, and is a skilled swimmer diving for over 10 minutes at a time. It has a circular, blue head with white circles around its eyes and a small, yellow beak. Piplup are very proud Pokémon that dislike receiving food from others, and don't like to be taken care of. It's difficult to bond with since it won't listen to its Trainer. It is a poor walker, often falling down, but as a very proud Pokémon, it always gets back up.
A Piplup owned by a beginner Pokémon coordinator, Dawn, has appeared in all of the 4th generation episodes, to date. Dawn befriended Piplup after saving it from a group of Ariados, and chose it as her starter Pokémon. Piplup's next stages, Prinplup and Empoleon are even more proud, bringing up the words "prince" and "emperor" in parts of their names. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, Piplup can be selected as a playable character. Piplup also appears in Super Smash Bros. Brawl. When released from a Poké Ball, Piplup slides along the stage using Surf. Anyone caught in it will be pushed, possibly off the stage, similar to Marill in Super Smash Bros. Melee. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Platinum chose a Piplup as her starter. Later on at Oreburgh City, Piplup had lost her ego when she failed to protect Platinum at the Oreburgh Mine, but regained it after winning the battle against Roark. While training in Eterna City for Platinum's Gym Battle with Gardenia, Piplup evolved along with Diamond's Turtwig and Pearl's Chimchar as Cynthia walks past them.


== Prinplup ==
Prinplup, Pottaishi (ポッタイシ) in original Japanese language versions, is the evolution of Piplup. Prinplup resembles a blue penguin. It has yellow three-toed feet. Its body is mostly light-blue. There are four button-like spots on its stomach. Its wings are dark-blue with light-blue tips. It apparently has claws hidden in the flesh of its wings because it can learn the moves Metal Claw and Shadow Claw. Prinplup's wings deliver wicked blows that snap even the thickest of trees. It has an owl-like face and two yellow crests running across the top of its head. It searches for prey in icy seas. It lives alone, away from others, because every Prinplup considers itself to be the most important, so they can never form a group.
Kenny, Dawn's rival, owns a Prinplup. It battled against Dawn's Piplup. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Platinum chose a Piplup as her starter. While training in Eterna City for Platinum's Gym Battle with Gardenia, Piplup evolved along with Diamond's Turtwig and Pearl's Chimchar as Cynthia walks past them. Prinplup later competed in Platinum's first contest in VS. Pachirisu. Prinplup evolves into Empoleon in VS. Gible in the Veilstone Department Store.


== Empoleon ==
Empoleon, Emperte (エンペルト, Emperuto) in original Japanese language versions, is the final evolution of the Piplup evolutionary line. Empoleon is a large penguin-like Pokémon. In terms of color, it has a closer resemblance to a "real-world" penguin than its pre-evolved forms have because it is mostly navy blue as opposed to being a lighter blue. Its feet actually appear to have webbing on them. Its wings are tipped with blue metal and have three golden claws sticking out on the inside. It has a short, blue, metal "fin" sticking out of its back and another "fin" on the front of its body that extends to where its chin would be to form a sort of collar. Empoleon can swim faster than a jet boat and, by using its razor sharp wings, which can cut huge icebergs in a matter of seconds. It has two gold-colored spots on its upper-back. Its most prominent feature is the gold three-horned trident-like crest that extends from its beak. This crest represents an Empoleon's power and the leader of a colony will have the largest horns. It avoids unnecessary disputes, but it will decimate anything that threatens its pride.
Empoleon appeared in the movie The Rise of Darkrai under the ownership of a Trainer named Kai. It also appeared in the anime in under the ownership of Barry. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Platinum chose a Piplup as her starter. While training in Eterna City for Platinum's Gym Battle with Gardenia, Piplup evolved. Prinplup evolves into Empoleon in VS. Gible in the Veilstone Department Store.


== Starly ==
Starly, Mukkuru (ムックル), in original Japanese language versions, is a Starling Pokémon. It is a bird with a gray-colored body. The lower half of its wings as well as its head are black. Its face looks like it is wearing a white mask, with black eyes with white pupils as well as a thin orange beak with the tip of it painted black. The female's forehead coloring is smaller than that of the male. On its chest is a white spot. Its feet are orange and also has three tailfeathers, two black and one white in the middle. Though small, they flap their wings with great power. It is barely noticeable when alone. Because they are weak individually, they form groups. However, they bicker if the group grows too big. They flock around mountains and fields, chasing after bug Pokémon. Their singing is noisy and annoying.
Both Ash and Paul catch Starly. Unlike Paul, Ash keeps his after catching it. Paul catches three of them, but releases two of them, complaining that "all they knew were Tackle and Sand-Attack", and releases the last one at the end of the same episode. Ash's Starly evolves into Staravia during a battle with Team Rocket.


== Staravia ==
Staravia, Mukubird (ムクバード, Mukubādo) in original Japanese language versions, is the evolution of Starly. It flies around forests and fields in search of bug Pokémon. Recognizing their own weakness, they always live in a group. Squabbles over territory occur when flocks collide. When alone, a Staravia cries noisily.
Staravia resembles a white-cheeked starling. Its most prominent feature is the curled crest on its head, similar to that of a lapwing. It has a black and orange colored beak like a quail. The name Staravia derives from the English words starling and avian. Staravia's Japanese name, Mukubird, is a portmanteau of the Japanese word for white-cheeked starling (椋鳥, mukudori) and the English word bird.
In the anime, Ash's Starly evolved into Staravia, and was frequently used in battles with Ash. Ash's Staravia evolved into Staraptor during a Pokeringer battle against Paul and his Honchkrow, which Ash won.


== Staraptor ==
Staraptor, Mukuhawk (ムクホーク, Mukuhōku) in original Japanese language versions, is the final evolution of the Starly evolutionary line. Staraptor bears a resemblance to a cross between a large gray and white starling and a hawk. It also shares similarities with the harpy eagle. The downward crest on its head makes it appear larger in order to frighten its enemies. When Staravia evolve into Staraptor, they leave the flock to live alone. It will courageously challenge foes that are much larger. The muscles in its wings and legs are strong. It can easily fly while gripping a small Pokémon. It never stops attacking even if it is injured. It fusses over the shape of its comb.
In the anime, Paul's brother Reggie owns a Staraptor, who also taught Ash's Staravia to use Brave Bird. Ash also owns a Staraptor. His Staraptor knows powerful moves such as Brave Bird and Close Combat. Staraptor is unique in that it can learn Close Combat despite not having fists.


== Bidoof ==
Bidoof, known in Japan as Bippa (ビッパ), are small brown rodent-like creatures with large front teeth which they use for gnawing on wood. Bidoof first appears in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl as an early Pokémon encountered by players. It later appears in HeartGold and SoulSilver as well as Pokémon Black and White. In the main games, Bidoof is often considered an "HM slave", a term which refers to a Pokémon that is only good for its ability to use most "Hidden machines". Outside of the main series, it also appears in some of the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, some of the Pokémon Ranger titles, Pokémon Rumble, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure. Bidoof have appeared a few times in the Pokémon anime, as well as the Pokémon Adventures manga. Bidoof has received generally negative reception since it appeared in Diamond and Pearl.
Bidoof have appeared a few times in the Pokémon anime. First randomly appearing in the wild and then having a whole episode where a Steelix is destroying a Bidoof village. Since then they have had many more appearances such as one being under care of Reggie, Paul's older brother. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Platinum was attacked by a group of Bidoof in her own house.
Bidoof has received generally negative reception since it appeared in Diamond and Pearl, GamesRadar called Bidoof, along with Rattata, Sentret, and Zigzagoon an "infestation", and an "ideal Pokémon to mess around with", though stated that its evolution Bibarel "can be a solid Normal-type Pokémon". Fellow GamesRadar editor Paul Ryan called Bidoof an "inbred offspring of a teddy bear and a beaver" and a Pokémon that "relies on cuteness and the pity of others to avoid being eaten by other Pokémon." Norm Scott of the humor comic Hsu and Chan mocked Bidoof and wrote that "nobody ever chooses you, Bidoof." IGN editor Lucas M. Thomas described it as a "dimwitted, buck-toothed rodent", a "resident pest of Sinnoh". He added that while it did not have "cool factor", he was a "loyal and trustworthy companion" in the early game. The Escapist‍ '​s Keane Ng called Bidoof "everyone's favorite bucktoothed, ubiquitous and completely useless and trash-tier Pokémon". Australia's Official Nintendo Magazine listed three reasons that they "hate" Pokémon Black 2 and White 2 (and another three they love), putting Bidoof on the hate list, saying "the beaver is conspicuous of his absence".
Nevertheless, Bidoof briefly gained fame for its hidden ability Moody, which sharply raises and slightly lowers two stats at random, allowing it to defeat well-prepared teams with some luck. The ability Moody is now accordingly banned in the competitive community.


== Bibarel ==
Bibarel, Beadull (ビーダル, Bīdaru) in original Japanese language versions, resembles a beaver. It is the only Pokémon that is both Water and Normal type(s). Bibarel are large bulky brown rodents with tan "masks", tan "bibs" on their chests and large broad tails. A male Bibarel's "mask" has two more circles on it than a female. It moves sluggishly out of water, but once it is submerged, it can swim faster than a Feebas. They have pronounced teeth which are used to chew through wood. Bibarel have incredibly sharp front teeth which are used for cutting down small trees to build dams and lodges. They then use their large tails to smack down mud to keep the dams and lodges waterproof. However, they have only slight potential in battle. Bibarel are known to be industrious workers. Bibarel live in rivers, where their dams will never overflow, which is appreciated by people nearby. It busily makes its nest with stacks of branches and roots it has cut up with its sharp incisors.
Bibarel first appeared in the anime randomly in the wild, then in "Bibarel Gnaws Best" where it was helping to make a bridge complete. Paul's older brother Reggie also has one, which appeared in "Lost Leader Strategy!".


== Kricketot ==
Kricketot (コロボーシ, Korobōshi, Korobohshi in original Japanese language versions) is a stout, red cricket that has two large antennas that function not only as feelers, but also as musical instruments. In order to create sounds, it swings its head around, causing the feelers to collide and make a sound like a xylophone. Kricketot's design is based on a composer or conductor; its body resembles an orchestra conductor's costume. Kricketot only learns the moves Growl, Bide, and Bug Bite in Pokémon Platinum. Collars of the female are noticeably larger than those of the male.


== Kricketune ==
Kricketune (コロトック, Korotokku, Korotok in original Japanese-language versions) resembles a dark red cricket standing upright. Its forearms curve into scythe-like shapes (compare with Scyther), perhaps resembling conductor's batons. It also has two large whiskers resembling a handlebar mustache above the nose. The "mustache" on the female is slightly smaller than the male's. Kricketune's name originates from the words cricket, spelled with a "K," and tune, as in a musical tune.
Its appearance resembles a violin, or double bass, with string-like lines on its neck. Due to these traits, its design could have been influenced by the real life violin beetle. But with its scythes, or bows (for a violin), it could most likely be instrument-designed, like its pre-evolution, Kricketot. Because of its musical nature, Nando owns one as well.


== Shinx ==
Shinx (コリンク, Korinku, Kolink in original Japanese language versions) is a sky-blue lion cub Pokémon that generates electricity from the yellow bands on its front legs, much like the red spots on Pikachu's cheeks. It also has a dark-gray rear, yellow eyes, fangs, and a star on its tail. Upon sensing danger, it shoots out a dazzling light from every hair on its body. While the opponent is blinded, it takes the opportunity to quickly escape. The yellow pattern on its ears and tail is reminiscent of flashes of light. Its shiny form is not rare.
In the anime, Angie owns a Shinx.


== Luxio ==
Luxio (ルクシオ, Rukushio), known as the Spark Pokémon, is lion-like, and has a black mane around its face, unlike its pre-evolution, Shinx. It also has two yellow rings around each of its front legs, whereas Shinx only has one around each. As it grows the mane grows longer and faster on the male than the female. Similar to Shinx, the portions of blue on a Luxio's hind legs are longer for females. Luxio uses its claws to emit electricity to communicate. A small scratch is enough to induce fainting. Its electricity is able to destroy trees but needs thunderstorms to regenerate the electricity pouch on its belly. In the wild, Shinx, Luxio, and Luxray generally live in small groups and hunt for food.
Luxio appeared in the movie The Rise of Darkrai among the Pokémon in the garden. Luxio seemed to be shy, as it hesitated before it ran to Ash and his friends' Pokémon. It participated in the short-lived massive fight. It also made a brief cameo at the beginning of Giratina and the Sky Warrior. In the Pokémon anime a Luxio helped a Wailmer that was trapped in the sewers and the Wailmer made it back into the ocean safely and evolved into a Wailord.
In the anime, Clemont owns a Luxio. Its shiny form is not rare.


== Luxray ==
Luxray (レントラー, Rentorā, Rentorar in original Japanese language versions) is a blue, yellow and black lion-like Pokémon that has red, gold-pupiled eyes. These are specially designed for X-ray vision, which enables this predatory Pokémon to spot hiding prey, even if hidden behind a wall. The manes of female Luxray are about a third the length of their male counterparts.
Luxray is one of the bosses in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness. He fights with 8 Luxio by his side.
Luxray, like its previous evolve form, Luxio, is portmanteau of the word lux, which means "light" in Latin, and x-ray, referring to the special qualities of its vision.
Luxray appeared in Pokémon anime as the partner of Marble, an amateur detective and as Volkner's Pokémon and is Green-XL's 2nd favorite Pokémon.


== Budew ==
Budew, Subomie (スボミー, Subomī) in Japan, is a dual-type Grass/Poison Pokémon. It was first introduced to Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series as Roselia's pre-evolve form.
It evolves into Roselia by happiness during the day, who evolves into Roserade by Shiny Stone. Players can breed Budew by giving a Roselia or Roserade some Rose Incense before leaving said Pokémon at the Day Care: not doing this yields a Roselia instead.
At first glance, Budew barely has any similarities to its evolved forms, Roselia and Roserade. However, when the two "vines" that are on top of Budew's head open up, two small buds can be seen underneath each vine (one that is blue and the other being red). A short leaf shaped like a bib can be seen below its chin.
When it evolves into a Roselia, the two buds will eventually bloom into the Pokémon's flower-holding arms while its bib shaped leaf will grow into long skirt shaped leaves extending down to its grown body.


== Roserade ==
Roserade (ロズレイド, Rozureido) is the final evolution of the Budew line of Pokémon, evolving from Roselia with a Shiny Stone. Instead of the two roses Roselia had, Roserade has a bouquet of roses for hands. Its appearance resembles to that of a masquerade, which is also the word that its name is derived from. A green mask surrounds its eyes and a long leaf shaped like a cape extends behind its back. The females have longer capes compared to males.
It lures its prey with a sweet aroma, then attacks with the movements of a dancer. It also has vines that are hidden behind the bouquet of flowers.
It is first introduced in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl as Roselia's evolved form by the use of Shiny Stone.
In the anime, Gardenia, Gym Leader of Eterna City, owns a Roserade. Barry also owns a Roserade.
In the games, Champion Cynthia also owns a Roserade.


== Cranidos ==
Cranidos (ズガイドス, Zugaidosu, Zugaidos in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon that first lived in jungles one hundred million years before the settings of the games. It can be resurrected from a Skull Fossil, a fossil similar to an iron ball. It uses its iron-like skull to headbutt its prey. It evolves into Rampardos at level 30.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.
The Gym Leader Roark uses one in Pokémon Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum. He also uses one in Ash's first Gym Battle.


== Rampardos ==
Rampardos (ラムパルド, Ramuparudo, Rampald in original Japanese language versions) is the evolution of Cranidos. Using its iron-like skull that packs enormously destructive power, it knocks down jungle trees and even the most durable objects in order to catch its prey. Rampardos and Cranidos are based on the dinosaur Pachycephalosaurus.
At base 165, Rampardos has the highest Attack stat of any non-legendary, non-mega evolved Pokémon. However, low defenses and Speed along with its many weaknesses make it difficult to use in most battles without proper support; for example, Baton Passing speed boosts to it or paralyzing the opposing team.
In the anime, Gym Leader Roark's Cranidos evolved into Rampardos prior to Ash's rematch. It was defeated by Turtwig's Razor Leaf, which may have scored a critical hit.


== Shieldon ==
Shieldon (タテトプス, Tatetopusu, Tatetops in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon that lived in jungles one hundred million years before the series. Though it has an extremely hard facial hide that it polishes by rubbing against tree trunks, it is weak to attacks from behind.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== Bastiodon ==
Bastiodon (トリデプス, Toridepusu, Torideps in original Japanese language versions) is a Pokémon with a castle-like face. It can repel any attack, and if a herd is attacked, they surround their young with a wall of their faces in order to protect them, similarly to what a buffalo colony does to protect their young. It is normally docile and feeds on grass and berries.


== Burmy ==
Burmy (ミノムッチ, Minomucchi in original Japanese language versions) is a Bagworm Pokémon that can take on three forms by making cloaks out of different materials depending on where it battles. In grassy areas, it creates a cloak of twigs and leaves that also protects it from cold winds. In caves, it makes a cloak out of sand and dirt. In buildings, it uses trash and other materials to make its cloak. If the cloak is broken in battle, it makes a new one quickly. Upon evolution, if female, a Burmy will evolve into Wormadam, which also takes on a form similar to the cloak the Burmy was wearing, while male Burmy evolve into Mothim.


== Wormadam ==
Wormadam (ミノマダム, Minomadamu, Minomadam in original Japanese language versions) is the evolved form of female Burmy. Wormadam is a unique Pokémon due to its multiple forms, which have different colors and different stats, as well as different secondary types. Wormadam's form is dependent upon the form of the Burmy from which it evolved, as the materials on it become part of Wormadam's body. If a Burmy evolves while battling inside a forest or in a grassy area it will evolve into the grass type Wormadam. If a Burmy evolves while battling inside a cave or on a mountainous region it will evolve into the ground type Wormadam. If a Burmy evolves while battling inside a building it will evolve into the steel type Wormadam. Unlike Burmy, Wormadam cannot change its cloak.


== Mothim ==
Mothim (ガーメイル, Gāmeiru, Garmeil in original Japanese language versions), known as the Moth Pokémon, has four tan-colored wings, two large and two small, with orange circles adorning them. The wings split to three at the tip of the larger wings and splits in two at the tips of the smaller wings. Mothim has a black head, with orange eyes and two red and gray antennae above his head. Mothim's body is also black with a patch of orange on the underside and his legs are gray. He also has a small black tail that splits into two. They also will have a small gray stripe running down their back. It does not keep a nest, but flies over fields and mountains in constant search of floral honey. Instead of gathering the honey itself, it steals it from Combee.
Cheryl has a Mothim, which assisted in finding the Amber Castle. He appeared in episodes between Some Enchanted Sweetening and An Angry Combeenation. A Mothim appeared in Pruning a Passel of Pals!. A group of Mothim appeared in Leading a Stray!. A Mothim also appeared in Historical Mystery Tour!. Another one appeared in Fighting Ire with Fire!, where it battled Barry's Empoleon.


== Combee ==
Combee (ミツハニー, Mitsuhanī, Mitsuhoney in original Japanese language versions), known as the Tiny Bee Pokémon, is a small insectoid Pokémon that resembles three pieces of orange, hexagonal honeycomb stuck together. Each hexagon has a round yellow face. The bottom-center face being the main thinker of the three is also the only one "bee" to have a full abdomen. The top two hexagons have a single antenna and a wing connected to an orange-colored joint. It collects and delivers honey to its colony, which they bring to Vespiqueen to please her. At night, they cluster in a group close to a thousand to form a beehive and sleep. Their honey is often stolen by Mothim.
Combee made an appearance in An Angry Combeenation. Several Combee made minor appearances living in the gardens of Alamos Town in The Rise of Darkrai. Three Combee appeared in a forest at the beginning of Giratina and the Sky Warrior. Combee also appeared living in Michina Town in Arceus and the Jewel of Life. A group of Combee appeared in Historical Mystery Tour!. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, a girl ordered her multiple Combee to attack Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum.


== Vespiquen ==
Vespiquen (ビークイン, Bīkuin, Beequeen in original Japanese language versions) is a single ruler of a colony of Combee, and is known as "The Queen of Insects". Its abdomen acts as a six-celled honeycomb for Combee grubs. They feed on honey collected by other Combee, and protect Vespiquen if its in danger. The jewel that is located on the head of every Vespiquen is used in battle to collect rays of light that can be reflected and fired at any enemy at will. Vespiquen is able to release various pheromones in order to give the grubs nesting in its body various orders. These orders reflect in its unique order attacks (Attack Order, Heal Order, and Defend Order) which it uses to command the grubs in its body to defend or heal itself, or to attack an enemy. Vespiquen are always female, as such only female Combee (which are less common than males) can evolve into it. Despite being a visual pun on the term, "queen bee" (it's a female bee that looks as if it's wearing a queen's dress and crown), the first part of Vespiquen's name comes from the Latin word vespa, meaning "wasp", and its coloration and body type are more reminiscent of a wasp than a bee.
Curiously, although official names have been abbreviated to adhere to the ten-character limit (for example, "Feraligatr"), "Vespiquen" is only nine letters long, meaning that it would have been fully possible to officially name it "Vespiqueen".
In the anime, it made its first appearance in an episode called "An Angry Combeenation" as the ruler of the Combee hive and the bearer of the Golder Honey.


== Pachirisu ==
Pachirisu (パチリス) is a squirrel-like Pokémon that charges electricity in the pouches of its cheeks and discharges shots from its tail. It lives in trees where it stores berries with protective static fur. In the Sinnoh hand guide, it stated that Pachirisu and Pikachu share many of the same qualities.
In the anime, Dawn caught a Pachirisu in the episode "Twice Smitten, Once Shy" where it was too much for her to handle, resulting in her deciding to release it. Eventually, though, she re-caught the Pachirisu.
It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.


== Buizel ==
Buizel (ブイゼル, Buizeru, Buoysel in original Japanese language versions) is a sea weasel Pokémon that uses a flotation sac that acts as an inflatable collar in order to float on the top of the water. Its name is a portmanteau of the words buoyancy, meaning to float, and weasel, the animal on what it is based. When it dives, its sac deflates and it uses its forked tail to swim by rotating it like a screw. Males have two spots on their back, while females only have one.
In the anime, Dawn captures a renegade Buizel in the episode "Buizel Your Way Out of This." It was traded to Ash. Later on in the series Buizel is involved in an epic battle with a Lucario between Ash and Maylene at the Veilstone Gym and also learns the attack move Water Pulse. Then Buizel learns Ice Punch by move tutor.
In Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia, a Ranger School friend, Keith, has a Buizel as his Partner Pokémon, which he met in the Fiore region.


== Floatzel ==
Floatzel (フローゼル, Furōzeru, Flowsel in original Japanese language versions) is a large, orange floating sea weasel Pokémon that has a larger floation sac than Buizel, stretching from its shoulders to its tail. It uses the sac as a rubber raft to help save drowning people.
In the games Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, the gym leader Crasher Wake owns a Floatzel. In the anime, he uses it in a battle against Ash in "A Crasher Course in Power!", where it is ultimately defeated by Ash's Buizel.


== Cherubi ==
Cherubi (チェリンボ, Cherinbo in original Japanese language versions) is a cherry Pokémon that uses a small berry on its head to store nutrients for its evolution and sunlight to keep it red. Once the berry is completely drained, it shrivels to show the upcoming evolution. The name is a portmanteau of the words cherry, as it is based on a cherry tree fruit, and ruby.
The Eterna City Gym leader Gardenia owns a Cherubi. cherubi (in Italian) is pink end green


== Cherrim ==
Cherrim (チェリム, Cherimu) is the evolved form of Cherubi. During normal weather conditions, it appears as two crossing purple petals with a short purple stem, a green leafy sepal covering, and two deep pink feet. Similar to Castform and unlike Cherubi, however, Cherrim's appearance changes to the cherry blossom form during sunny conditions. Though the bud form is quite docile, the flower form is much more cheerful.
In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl game, its Flower Gift ability is not a purely aesthetic change, as it strengthens the Attack and Special Defense of itself and its teammates when it is sunny. Cherrim learns the existing attack Sunny Day to make the weather sunny, as well as a new attack called Lucky Chant, which prevents critical hits. Cherrim can also learn a new attack, Worry Seed, which temporarily changes the target's ability to Insomnia.
Cherrim was designed by Satoshi Tajiri and Ken Sugimori, and conceptual artwork was drawn by Sugimori. It was revealed in the August 2006 issue of CoroCoro Comic, and first appeared in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, published in Japan on September 28, 2006. Its English name was revealed at American International Toy Fair in February 2007.


== Shellos ==
Shellos (カラナクシ, Karanakushi) is a "sea slug Pokémon" that exists in two different forms, an example of allopatric speciation. A pink Shellos comes from the west of Sinnoh's mountain range, and a blue Shellos comes from the east. Shellos learns three Ground attacks, which are the second generation Mud-Slap, the third generation Mud Sport, and the fourth generation Mud Bomb. It can have one of two abilities: the pre-existing Sticky Hold, and the new ability Storm Drain, which draws Water-type attacks to this Pokémon during a double battle.
Shellos was designed by Ken Sugimori and Satoshi Tajiri. Sugimori also drew conceptual artwork of Shellos. It first appeared in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, published in Japan on September 28, 2006. Its English name was revealed at American International Toy Fair in February 2007. Junichi Masuda commented in the May 2007 issue of Nintendo Power that "There's also a sea-slug Pokémon that we weren't able to put in Ruby and Sapphire that we were able to put in this one, Pokémon Diamond and Pearl".
In the anime, Zoey owns a Shellos, of the West Sea variant. Shellos plushes and action figures can be found in various stores. GamesRadar stated that Shellos had a misleading design, stating "Shellos is the spitting image of what you’d imagine a baby Lapras would look like", presumably referring to the East Sea variant. They later stated that Shellos were "downright cute".


== Gastrodon ==
Gastrodon (トリトドン, Toritodon) is the evolved form of Shellos. Like its pre-evolved form, Gastrodon is a "sea slug Pokémon" that follows allopatric speciation; those found in western Sinnoh are pink and brown, while eastern Gastrodon are blue and green. In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, the creature is used by Cynthia, the Pokémon League Champion. Gastrodon uses the same two abilities as Shellos. Cynthia's Gastrodon appears with her in DP096 & DP097.
Gastrodon was designed by Ken Sugimori and Satoshi Tajiri. Sugimori also drew conceptual artwork of Gastrodon. It first appeared in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, published in Japan on September 28, 2006. Junichi Masuda commented in the May 2007 issue of Nintendo Power that "There's also a sea-slug Pokémon that we weren't able to put in Ruby and Sapphire that we were able to put in this one Pokémon Diamond and Pearl ", likely referring to Shellos. Its name is probably based on the animal, Gastrotrich.

GamesRadar stated that Shellos were "downright cute", "but once they’ve evolved...are a different story".


== Ambipom ==
Ambipom (エテボース, Etebōsu, Eteboth in Japanese language trademarks) is the evolved form of Aipom. The name is derived from the words, ambi, which means two (such as ambidextrous), and Aipom. It appears with two tails, which have fingers tipped in red, and two long hairs at the top of its head. These hairs are longer on the female than the male. Ambipom's feet - which were the same color as its stomach when an it was an Aipom - are now purple. Its arms are stated to be used significantly less than if it were still an Aipom; the two tails perform the arms' duties with better efficiency and forms a circle as a sign of friendship.
In the anime, after Ash traded his Aipom for Dawn's Buizel, it later on evolved into an Ambipom after learning Double Hit. Shortly thereafter, Dawn decides to give it to a Ping Pong master so it can become skilled in the sport.


== Drifloon ==
Drifloon (フワンテ, Fuwante, Fuwante in Japanese language trademarks) resembles a toy balloon with two strings and cross-like patch. Its name is derived from the words, "drift" and "balloon". Drifloon has a wispy cloud on its head, and the ends of its two strings resemble hearts. It is often said to have attempted to abduct children but is so light that it ends up being pulled along like a party balloon. Drifloon and its evolution are the only two Pokémon that are ghost- and flying-type. Its classification as the 'Balloon' Pokémon is shared with Igglybuff and its evolutions Jigglypuff and Wigglytuff as well as the water/poison Pokémon Qwilfish.
In the anime, Drifloon first appeared in an episode called "Drifloon on the Wind" where it belongs to a Nurse Joy and her two daughters, Marnie (Sayaki) and Paige (Mai). A Drifloon is also owned by Fantina, Hearthrome City gym leader.
In Pokémon Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum Versions a Drifloon can only be obtained at the Valley Windworks on Fridays after defeating Commander Mars of Team Galactic for the first time. In Black and White it can only be bred from "Drifblim". In Black and White 2 it can be caught in the Hidden Grotto in Route 13, though it requires luck. In HeartGold and SoulSilver, it can only be obtained through trading.
It also has a cameo on the Pokémon Stadium 2's flying stage in Super Smash Bros. Brawl.


== Drifblim ==
Drifblim (フワライド, Fuwaraido, Fuwaride in original Japanese language trademarks) resemble hot air balloons with wings that resemble flags. Like its pre-evolved form, its name is partially derived from the word, drift; however it is also partially derived from the word blimp. Drifblim have a wispy cloud on their heads and a large yellow "X" on their faces resembling a taped up balloon. It is able to carry humans and Pokémon to various places using the wind as a guide. Drifblim first appeared in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl.
In the anime, Drifblim first made its appearance as one of Hearthome City Gym Leader Fantina's Ghost type Pokémon.
One of its known Ghost-type moves is Ominous Wind, a new move which has a 10% chance of raising all of the user's stats (except accuracy and evasion) if it hits (similarly to Ancientpower and Silver Wind).
GameDaily ranked Drifblim fourth on their list of the "Top 10 Weirdest Looking Pokémon", stating "We're not sure why there's a Pokémon that resembles a hot air balloon with marshmallow fluff (at least we hope it's fluff) on its head. After all, how do you give that a hug?".


== Buneary ==
Buneary (ミミロル, Mimiroru, Mimirol in Japanese language trademarks) are based on rabbits. Its name is derived from the words, bunny and eary, which refers to its ears. Their fur is mostly brown, with accented, lighter areas on their ears, feet, and underbelly. The lower half of the body has cream-colored fur resembling a cloud. The ears can be rolled up like buns and deliver punches.
Dawn's Buneary has a crush on Ash's Pikachu.


== Lopunny ==
Lopunny (ミミロップ, Mimiroppu, Mimilop), known as the Rabbit Pokémon, is the evolved form of Buneary. It evolves from Buneary when leveled up with high happiness. Lopunny are extremely cautious, and cloak their body with their fluffy ear fur when they sense danger. It is very conscious of its looks and never fails to groom its ears. It runs with sprightly jumps. The ears appear to be delicate. If they are touched roughly, it kicks with its graceful legs. It sheds its fur twice a year. Its winter fur is soft and fluffy. Lopunny is confirmed to have a Mega Evolution in Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness, Lopunny is the head of Team Charm, and is a longtime friend of guild leader Wigglytuff. Together, her team and the player's team explore Aegis Cave and defeat Regigigas. In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky, Team Charm debut in their own special episode, Lopunny being the playable character. She is shown to be a fun loving member of the group, ending almost all of her sentences with hearts. Lopunny made its debut anime appearance in Arriving in Style! belonging to a Pokémon stylist named Paris. A Lopunny appeared in Meowth's fantasy in Noodles: Roamin' Off. Nando's Lopunny made its first appearance in Coming Full Festival Circle!. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Platinum caught a Lopunny before she challenged Candice. Its powerful attacks managed to knock out Abomasnow, but it was pinned down by Froslass and sacrificed itself with Healing Wish to heal Platinum's Rapidash.
Lopunny was listed among rabbits in popular culture. GamesRadar editor Carolyn Gudmundson listed the "humanoid" design of Pokémon as one of the most overused designs in the Pokémon series, citing Lopunny as an example; she also cited Lopunny as an example of how the series has failed to "tone down" the weird humanoid designs; she described Lopunny as a "sexy humanoid rabbit." GamesRadar also included Lopunny in their list of "fugly Pokémon". They cited its cry and its pose, the former described as "suggestive". They also criticized Lopunny for its lack of creativity, commenting that while the Nidorans had two Pokémon for each gender, Lopunny only had one. They added that a better idea would be to make the male version masculine, describing such an idea as a "Machamp-esque bunny." However, they praised the Pokémon Battle Revolution incarnation of Lopunny as being "much improved" over the Diamond and Pearl incarnation. Fellow GamesRadar editor Darryl Vassar described Lopunny as a "bunny bombshell" as well as "curvaceous".


== Mismagius ==
Mismagius (ムウマージ, Mūmāji, Mumargi in Japanese language trademarks) is the evolved form of Misdreavus. It evolves from Misdreavus using a Dusk Stone. It has the general appearance of a stereotypical witch; with a pointed head similar to a witch's hat, and a long cloak-like body. It has red jewels around its neck, similar to its pre-evolved form Misdreavus. Mismagius's screeches sound like incantations. Those who hear these cries are tormented by hallucinations and headaches, though a few people will occasionally be brought good luck upon hearing these screeches.
In the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl games and anime, Fantina, Gym Leader of Hearthome City, owns a Mismagius. Mismagius is also associated with spirits.
In Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, Morty, the Gym Leader of Ecruteak City, has a Level 54 Mismagius in his rematch battle.
GamesRadar listed Mismagius on their list of "The most disturbing Pokémon of all time", citing the way its screams torment people.


== Honchkrow ==
Honchkrow (ドンカラス, Donkarasu, Dongkarasu in Japanese language trademarks) evolves from a Murkrow exposed to a Dusk Stone. Its name is derived from, "crow" and "honcho" (from the phrase "head honcho", meaning the boss or leader of a group, particularly one involving crime). Honchkrow is a black (though it's colored blue in the anime and video game sprites) bird Pokémon roughly twice the size of its pre-evolution, Murkrow. Honchkrow has red tail feathers and the underside of its wings are partially red. Honchkrow has a feathery collar that resembles a long white beard (or the white dress shirt of a fancy men's suit). Honchkrow has a straight, yellow beak, circular eyes with red pupils, and a feather crest that resembles a fedora with a feather in the band. Honchkrow is based on a crow with aspects of a crime boss (judging by the fedora and its habit of stealing from others) or a pimp (judging by its fedora-like crest, its feathers that resemble a cape, and how it orders around Murkrow into doing its bidding). It also resembles the beaked plague doctors of the seventeenth century.
Honchkrow have been known to organize flocks of Murkrow. These flocks have been seen flying at night. The purpose of the flocks is unclear, but they are known to collect food for the Honchkrow that organized them. Honchkrow normally spend the daytime hours tending to their feathers in solitude.


== Glameow ==
Glameow (ニャルマー, Nyarumā, Nyarmar in Japanese language trademarks) is a gray cat, with a curled, spring-shaped tail and a white fluff at the tip of it. Its name is derived from the words, glamorous (meaning, "beauty") and meow (an onomatopoeia of a cat). It has a crescent shaped head with two ears, the tips of which are white. It also has a small black nose, yellow eyes with blue irises, and white paws. Three out of every four Glameow are female, similar to how almost all tortoiseshell/calico-patterned cats are female. It is also capable of learning the move, Bounce which allows it to use its spring-shaped tail to bounce. It is known as the third feline Pokémon following previous generation of cat Pokémon such as Meowth, Persian, Skitty and Delcatty.
Glameow is exclusive to Pokémon Pearl game. It is also a favorite of Team Galactic.
In the anime, Glameow is owned by Dawn's mother, Johanna, and also Dawn's contest rival, Zoey. Zoey's Glameow is her strongest. In the grandfestival, it caught Piplup's whirlpool with her tail.


== Purugly ==
Purugly (ブニャット, Bunyatto, Bunyat in Japanese language trademarks) is the evolved form of Glameow. It is a grey-and-white creature that resembles a feline with a rather large body and short legs. Its two whiskers are bent at the ends. Wild ones are known to be brazen and will attempt to invade another Pokémon's nest on sight. A Purugly's head, like its previous evolution, Glameow, resembles a crescent, though the purple-tipped ears have a fringe at the end.
It is exclusive to Pokémon Pearl, where Glameow is used by many of the members of the Team Galactic antagonists; Galactic Commander Mars uses a Purugly. These Pokémon are surprisingly quick for being so robust. As to confirm a Glameow's transition from a slender to heavyset physique during evolution, a Glameow with the Limber ability will exchange it for the Thick Fat ability during evolution. A Purugly can also have the Own Tempo ability, which prevents confusion.


== Chingling ==
Chingling (リーシャン, Rīshan, Lisyan in Japanese language trademarks) is a small, yellow bell-like Pokémon. Chingling moves by lightly bouncing around. It makes a ringing sound every time it bounces. The ringing sound isn't always a delightful chime-it can deafen an opponent with the high-frequency rings. The creature appears in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl at Mt. Coronet. It evolves into Chimecho when at maximum happiness.


== Stunky ==
Stunky (スカンプー, Sukanpū, Skunpoo in Japanese language trademarks), known as the Skunk Pokémon, is a dark purple skunk-like Pokémon with a beige stripe down its back. It protects itself by spraying a noxious fluid from its rear. The stench lingers for 24 hours. Its stench spreads over a mile radius, driving Pokémon away. It is exclusive to Pokémon Diamond. It first appears in the anime in "A Secret Sphere of Influence", where it is used by Officer Jenny in place of Growlithe.


== Skuntank ==
Skuntank (スカタンク, Sukatanku, Skutank in Japanese language trademarks) is the evolved form of Stunky. It resembles a large hog-nosed skunk with a bushy and voluminous striped tail that covers part of its face. Its entire body is covered in dark purple fur, except for the areas around its snout and paws, which are beige in color. Skuntank has the ability to shoot a foul-smelling secretion from the tip of its tail up to about 160 feet away. Skuntank is exclusive to Pokémon Diamond, and its natural moveset is identical to its pre-evolution, Stunky's, except for the addition of the move Flamethrower. Team Galactic Commander Jupiter uses a Skuntank; both appeared in DP096 and DP097 along with Mars, Saturn, and Cyrus.
In Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time/Darkness, Skuntank is the evil leader of Team Skull, with his underlings Koffing and Zubat. He and his cronies stop the player and his partner from getting to food underneath a tree, and engage them in combat. However, Skuntank redeems himself by willingly returning the partner's Relic Fragment after being defeated in Brine Cave.
Due to the censor that prevents players from using offensive language, Skuntank's name cannot be used for nicknames and team names in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Gates to Infinity, presumably because its name contains the four-letter string "kunt".
Despite being a Pokémon name, Skuntank cannot be entered as a name in Wheel of Fortune due to the word filter. If you try to do so, you will get the message, "The name you entered is not allowed".
Due to the censor on the 3DS, Skuntank's name brings up the warning screen when it is entered as the nickname of a Mii character on the Mii Maker. It is impossible to share a Mii named Skuntank in certain situations.


== Bronzor ==
Bronzor (ドーミラー, Dōmirā, Domirror in Japanese language trademarks) resembles a circular mirror with two yellow eyes in the center. Bronzor have no gender. Small spherical knobs line its perimeter in a hexagonal formation, also making it look like a tambourine. It also looks like a clock, as said in the Pokémon Handbook by Scholastic[7]. It also has a tree-like pattern on its back, which can only be seen when it is caught and sent out in battle or when the player looks at Bronzor's gender difference page in the Pokédex (obtained at a certain point in the game) after meeting one. This design resembles ancient bronze mirrors from East Asia. The creature was introduced in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, where they can be found at Mt. Coronet, Wayward Cave, and Route 206. Both Bronzor and its evolution have poor Speed, Attack, and Special Attack, but extremely high Defense and Special Defense. However, its poor speed can be a blessing in disguise thanks to two moves it can learn: Gyro Ball and Trick Room.


== Bronzong ==
Bronzong (ドータクン, Dōtakun) is the evolved form of Bronzor. It has the appearance of a giant steel bell with the yoke still attached, based on Zhou Dynasty bells called zhong or Japanese dotaku bells. The combination of two red-colored circles and a gradient design between them give Bronzong a face with two eyes and a large sack. Its appearance is vaguely Aztec in design. Round eyes and sometimes mouths are a common pattern (called taotie) on shang and zhou bronze vessels. Originally an ancient Pokémon, one was dug up at a construction site after 2000 years. Apparently, ancient peoples revered it as a bringer of plentiful harvests for its ability to summon rain. Fittingly, Bronzong naturally learns the moves Rain Dance and Sunny Day.


== Bonsly ==
Bonsly (ウソハチ, Usohachi in Japanese language trademarks) is a small pot-like creature resembling a bonsai tree. Despite its tree-like appearance, Bonsly is actually made of rock. Bonsly often shed tears, though it has been found out that those are "fake tears", and that it is adjusting its body fluid level. Appropriately enough, it can learn the move Fake Tears, which sharply decreases its target's Special Defense, which is unfortunately of no practical use to Bonsly, which has unimpressive Special Attack. Wild Bonsly exist only in the Pearl Version, and upon learning how to Mimic, they evolve into the familiar Sudowoodo.
The species was introduced in 2004 in an issue of Coro Coro Magazine. It was included in the 2005 game Pokémon XD: Gale of Darkness, where the player must rescue one from the wreckage of S.S. Libra and reunite it with its trainer, a small girl. Completing the quest also unlocks the "Bonsly Card" for the game's Battle Bingo mode, where Bonsly can be used in battle. It also appears as a statue in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team as a reward for an optional rescue mission. Its first anime appearance is in the eighth Pokémon movie, Pokémon: Lucario and the Mystery of Mew. Bonsly first appeared in the main video game series in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Bonsly also appears in the "From Cradle to Save" episode, where Brock obtains it. Brock's Bonsly eventually evolved into Sudowoodo. In the game Super Smash Bros. Brawl, Bonsly makes an appearance as a Poké Ball Pokémon. When let out, it can be hefted by players to chuck at opponents, dealing massive damage upon contact, although carrying Bonsly makes it difficult to walk.


== Mime Jr. ==
Mime Jr. (マネネ, Manene in Japanese language trademarks), known as the Mime Pokémon, is a small pink Pokémon with a black torso. Mime Jr. has a red bump on its stomach and a typical red clown nose on its face. It appears to be wearing a blue, crooked hat with a white ball on it. Mime Jr. can pick up the emotions of those around them, and has a knack for imitating others, sometimes in order to create distractions. While being mimed, the foe can't look away from this Pokémon.
It was originally released in a 2004 edition of Coro Coro magazine in Japan. Mime Jr. is one of three Pokémon on the player's team in the demo version of Diamond and Pearl. When it learns the move Mimic, it can evolve into Mr. Mime upon level-up. Mime Jr. makes a cameo appearance as a collectable statue in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team before its official appearance in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. It can also be selected as a partner Pokémon in Pokémon Ranger: Shadows of Almia.
The creature's first anime appearance is in the eighth Pokémon movie, Pokémon: Lucario and the Mystery of Mew, where it is owned by Lady Ilene, the queen of Cameron Palace. Mime Jr. appears in the second episode of Pokémon: Battle Frontier; "Sweet Baby James", where it belongs to James' Nanny and Pop-pop; the caretakers of his family's summer mansion in Kanto. However, it decides to travel with James and jumps into one of his Poké Balls. It regularly inserts itself at the end of the Team Rocket motto with the words "Mime, mime". James is protective of Mime Jr. and doesn't allow it to battle, but was used for contests instead. A Mime Jr. and a Bonsly that were stars of a television show went missing in King and Queen for a Day. When the two Pokémon were found, they were discovered to be sick and James's Mime Jr. and Brock's Bonsly had to fill in for them.


== Happiny ==
Happiny (ピンプク, Pinpuku in Japanese language trademarks) are an exclusively female Pokémon and is first introduced Pokémon Diamond and Pearl series as Chansey's pre-evolved form. It is regarded as a Playhouse Pokémon due to its 'playful' and 'happy' nature. It has a ponytail on top of its hair. Happiny like to carry egg-shaped objects in its pouch, imitating Chansey and Blissey, the Pokémon that it can eventually evolve into.
In the Pokémon Diamond and Pearl games, a trainer is given a Happiny Egg to hatch and care for as they tour Hearthome City, home of Sinnoh's Contest Hall. It will evolve if it holds an Oval Stone upon leveling up during the daytime. More Happiny can be hatched if their evolved forms hold Luck Incense during the breeding process in Solaceon City.
In the anime, Happiny first appeared in an episode called, "All Dressed Up With Somewhere To Go", Brock acquires an egg, which later hatches into a Happiny in "One Big Happiny Family!".
GameDaily ranked Happiny 10th on their list of the "Top 10 Weirdest Looking Pokémon", stating while they found the character cute, it "looks like Kirby in drag".


== References ==