Jamba Juice Company is a restaurant retailer headquartered in Emeryville, California, with over 800 locations operating in 26 states, the Bahamas, Canada, the Philippines, Mexico, Taiwan and South Korea. There are approximately 287 company-owned locations and 517 franchise-operated stores in the United States of America, in addition to the 45 international stores.


== HistoryEdit ==
Jamba Juice was conceived and founded in March 31, 1965 by Kirk Perron, an avid cyclist and healthy-lifestyle advocate who opened his first store in San Luis Obispo, California. He was joined in the business by three friends: Kevin Peters, Joe Vergara, and Linda Ozawa Olds. It was incorporated in 1990 as Juice Club, Inc. in San Luis Obispo.
Jamba Juice acquired all nationwide Zuka Juice, Inc. stores in October 2000. Zuka Juice was founded in Orem, Utah, by Dave Duffin and also was a prominent smoothie company at the time. Since then, Jamba Juice has expanded to become a well known smoothie chain. The first location in New York was at Columbus Circle and 59th Street in the basement of the Time Warner Center and is part of the Whole Foods Market seating area. Other locations include one south of Union Square, Times Square, Tribeca, and one in the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
On August 14, 2003, Jamba Juice agreed to be acquired by Services Acquisition Corp. International for $265 million. Services Acquisition is headed by Steven Berrard, former CEO of Blockbuster Inc. Upon the closing of the transaction, the publicly traded Services Acquisition changed its name to Jamba, Inc.
In June 2006, Jamba, Inc. announced that it had completed a $35.0 million convertible preferred stock transaction. The convertible preferred stock becomes redeemable by Jamba, Inc. at the election of the purchasers in June 2016 unless converted earlier and includes an 8% annual dividend. The preferred stock is convertible into common shares at a price of $1.15 per share.
The funding was led by a $19.55 million investment by Mistral Equity Partners, a private equity fund focused on consumer products and services companies, with the remaining $15.45 million investment made by a company controlled by the Serruya Family, a successful entrepreneurial Canadian-based family who founded the Yogen Früz frozen yogurt and smoothie chain. “We are very excited about Jamba and the potential growth opportunities available to the company as it extends the brand through licensing and franchising opportunities,” said Andrew Heyer, managing partner of Mistral Equity Partners. “This transaction complements our focus exclusively on investing in consumer businesses with strong management teams that capitalize on emerging demographic or psychographic trends.”
In December 2008, Jamba began a strategic move to transform the company from a smoothie shop to include a line of wraps, sandwiches, salads, and flatbreads. Jamba currently has over 750 locations in 26 states across the U.S. and a small number of international outlets.
In July 2009, in promoting its new line of products, Jamba Juice was criticized for running an advertising campaign which was described as a "ripoff" of the work of cartoonist David Rees. The ad campaign looked similar to Rees' "Get Your War On" series. Rees was informed of the Jamba Juice ads by a fan who sent in a letter. Rees stated that "Jamba Juice bit my style, with no credit, and it's kind of disrespectful."


=== 2007 Nestlé deal and entrance into breakfast foodsEdit ===
In December 2007, it was announced that Jamba would be partnering with Nestlé to lend its name to a line of healthy, ready-to-drink beverages under the Jamba brand; they would offer two different products: Smoothies and juices. On December 19, 2008, a press release from Nestle USA and Jamba Juice announced suspension of Jamba ready-to-drink products due to "...challenges...with manufacturing on a consistent basis, resulting in inventory and out-of-stock issues."


== Freshly Squeezed JuicesEdit ==
In 2014 Jamba Juice launched its expanded Fresh Juice menu, and began making juices blends to order with fresh ingredients such as kale, spinach, chard, beets, pineapple, apples, carrots, oranges, cucumber, chia seeds, ginger, lemon, and cayenne pepper. Flavors include:
Tropical Greens (apple, super greens, pineapple, chia seeds)
Citrus Kick (orange, ginger, apple, pineapple)
Veggie Harvest (apple, carrot, ginger, beets, super greens)
Orange Reviver (orange, apple, beets, banana, chia seeds)
Great Greens (lemon, apple, cucumber, super greens, chia)
Apple Aid (ginger, lemon, apple)
Carrot Cayenne (ginger, carrots, apple, cayenne pepper)
Garden Medley (apple, carrot, super greens)
Purely Orange (fresh orange juice)
Purely Carrot (fresh carrot juice)
Orange Carrot Twist (fresh orange and carrot juice)
Orange Berry Antioxidant (orange, strawberry, raspberry, blueberry)
Kale Orange Power (orange, kale, banana)
Triple Revitalizer (orange, carrot, banana)
Tropical Kick-Start (orange, mango)
Super Greens (spinach, kale, chard)


== SmoothiesEdit ==
All Fruit Smoothies: Mega Mango, Peach Perfection, Pomegranate Paradise, Strawberry Whirl
Classics: Aloha Pineapple, Banana Berry, Caribbean Passion, Mango-a-go-go, Peach Pleasure, Pomegranate Pick-Me-Up, Razzmatazz, Strawberries Wild, Strawberry Surf Rider (Classic Smoothies now have the "Make It Light" option with 1/3 fewer calories, carbs, and sugars. Make it light dairy-base is sweetened with Splenda.):
Creamy Treats: Chocolate Moo'd, Matcha Green Tea Blast, Orange Dream Machine, Peanut Butter Moo'd
Fruit and Veggie Smoothies: Apple N' Greens, Berry UpBEET, Orange Carrot Karma, Tropical Harvest
Pre-Boosted Smoothies: Acai Super Antioxidant, Protein Berry Workout, Orange-C-Booster
Fit 'N Fruitful Smoothies: Berry Blend, Strawberry Raspberry Banana, Peach Mango
Whole Food Nutrition Smoothies: Kale-ribbeon Breeze, Carrot Orange Fusion, PB Chocolate Love
Seasonal: Pumpkin Smash, Eggnog Jubilee
Kids: Strawberries Gone Bananas, Poppin’ Peach Mango, Berry Beat It, Strawberry Blueberry Blast-Off


== FoodEdit ==


=== Energy BowlsEdit ===
Acai Bowls – Acai Berry Bowl, Acai Primo Bowl, Tropical Acai Bowl
Fruit and Yogurt Bowls: Mango Peach Bowl, Chunky Strawberry Bowl, Berry Bowl.
Simply Greek Yogurt Bowls: Blueberry Banana Greek Yogurt Bowl, Strawberry Greek Yogurt Bowl


=== Steel-Cut OatmealEdit ===
Fresh Banana (Cooked organic steel-cut oats, soy milk, fresh banana, brown sugar crumble)
Blueberry Blackberry (Cooked organic steel-cut oats, soy milk, blueberry blackberry, toppings, brown sugar crumble)
Apple Cinnamon (Cooked organic steel-cut oats, soy milk, apple cinnamon toppings, brown sugar crumble)


=== California FlatbreadEdit ===
Smokehouse Chicken Flatbread


=== Breakfast WrapsEdit ===
Spicy Chorizo
Spinach N' Cheese


=== Baked GoodsEdit ===
Garlic Basil Pretzel
Olive and Herbs Twist
Parmesan Onion Twist


== “Secret" Underground smoothiesEdit ==
The secret menu options will not be found on the menu boards, but can be made upon request. Additional underground flavors can be made by modifying any current flavor option by, for instance, substituting one fruit or juice of another or adding extra ingredients.
Some underground flavors:
White Gummi
Red Gummi
Sour Gummi
Pink Star
Fruity Rocks


== See alsoEdit ==

Booster Juice
Milkshake
Orange Julius
Robeks
Smoothie
Talbott Teas


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Official website