Pacita Complex National High School (PCNHS),known as Pacita National, is a public secondary high school in San Pedro, Laguna,in the Philippines. It was founded on 13 November 1997, began offering education in 1999, and now runs curriculum in Science and Technology Engineering Program, and Secondary and Basic Education.


== History ==
PCNHS is located at Sampaguita Street, Pacita Complex I, San Vicente, San Pedro, Laguna. It has three buildings and a bungalow, housing a total of 28 classrooms which serves 2,800 students as of SY 2006-2007. As a young school, it is undeniably facing several major problems, one of which is the insufficient resources. Though it has an organized library, the reference materials are not enough to suffice the demands of the students and teachers. Moreover, the school adopts the AM-PM Session, wherein classes are done in two shifts because of limited classrooms and teachers. Charmaine Galano, a cum-laude of the University of the Philippines - Diliman. Galano was the Class Valedictorian of PCNHS First Batch of Graduates who became a UP scholar and subsequently made her way to finish her Bachelor of Arts in Psychology just recently.


== Science and technology Engineering Program (STEP) ==
Science and Technology – As a Science and Math-Oriented Program, PCNHS offerS special courses in Science. Freshmen take Integrated Science and Environmental Science or Earth Science for elective; sophomores take Biological Science and Research 1 for electives; Juniors take Chemistry as a major subject, Physics and Biotechnology for electives; and seniors take Advanced Physics as major while Advanced Chemistry and Research 2 for electives.
Mathematics – Freshmen take Elementary Algebra. Sophomores cover Geometry as major while Intermediate Algebra and Basic Statistics for elective. Juniors study Advanced Algebra, Analytic Geometry as majors and Advanced Statistics for Elective. Seniors take Trigonometry and Introduction to Calculus.
English – The freshman English course focuses more on grammar, composition writing and Philippine Literature and Developmental Reading for Elective. The sophomores study the literature of Asia and Africa, as well as advance topics in communication arts and grammar. Ramayana of Valmiki is the piece for the second year level. Juniors focus more on reading and comprehension using literary pieces from American and English literature. Seniors are taught English in terms of real world applications, such as job interviews, plays, and literary criticisms.
Filipino – The Filipino program for the first year students discuss the characteristics of the Filipino language and grammar lessons. Ang Ibong Adarna is the piece for literature for the freshmen. The second year students, They take up Florante at Lauraof Francisco Balagtas . The third year students study literary criticism with various literary pieces taken from different regions of the Philippines and a special topic for José Rizal’s Noli Me Tangere. Fourth year students step on advanced literary criticism. They study Rizal’s El Filibusterismo.
Social Studies – Freshmen begin their social studies course with Geography and Philippine History and Government. Sophomores study Asian History and Culture. Juniors study World History and Geography. Seniors take Economics in relation to Philippines’ economic status.
Research – Subject courses in Research are only offered to Second and Fourth year students. Sophomores are offered basic theoretic principles in research. Sophomores must create a Research Paper from Chapters 1 to 3. Seniors are given advanced applied principles in research and Thesis Writing. Students are required to conduct their own research study and a defense is required at the end of their course.
Technology and Livelihood Education (ICT) – Freshmen take Basic Computer Education and Microsoft Office. Sophomores take Computer Education, The Internet and Photo Editing. Juniors take HTML and Web Page Designing. Seniors take Computer Education and Programming.
Values Education – All year levels about values enrichment and community.
Music and Arts – Freshmen take Basic Music Elements and Philippine Music. Sophomores and Juniors take Asian Music and some topics in European Music. Seniors take World Music.
Physical Education and Health – Students take various physical education topics and sports. And in health, Students study about health and drug awareness, reproductive health etc.
Journalism – A special group which is offered for First Year to Fourth Year. The English Publication which is, The Dove and in Filipino, Ang Dalisay.
Year Level and Sections (Science Curriculum)


== Mr. and Ms. Earth PCNHS ==


== Paciklaban ==
A celebration during annual Foundation Day. It is the highlight event during the celebration of Founding Anniversary. This is to showcase the talents of Pacitians in terms of Singing, Dancing and playing Instruments.
Categories :
Singing Contest
Solo
Duet

Dance Contest
Interpretative Dance
Social Dance
Modern Dance
Folk Dance

Battle of the Bands


== The Dove and Ang Dalisay ==
The Dove and Ang Dalisay are the official publication of Pacita Complex National High School. The organization equips the students to enhance journalistic skills. Pacita Complex National High School is known for excellence in Radio Script Writing and Broadcasting in the entire Division of Laguna. For two consecutive years, PCNHS hailed as Champion in Radio Script Writing and Broadcasting Filipino Category during the conduct of Division Secondary Schools Press Conference 2013 and 2014 while the English Category placed Third during the DSSPC 2014. This marked PCNHS as warriors in Radio Broadcasting. Furthermore, PCNHS also excels in Individual Categories such as News Writing, Editorial Writing, Editorial Cartooning, Copyreading and Headline Writing, Sports Writing.


== References ==