Parked is a 2011 Irish drama film written by Ciaran Creagh and directed by Darragh Byrne about homelessness, friendship, and the will to survive adversity, whilst still retaining poise.


== Plot ==
Fred (Colm Meaney) lives a quiet, isolated life in his car, having lost all hope of improving his situation. That all changes when he forms an unlikely friendship with Cathal (Colin Morgan), a dope-smoking 21-year-old with a positive attitude, who becomes his 'neighbour.' Sharing laughs and the hard times too, Fred and Cathal find the simple, free pleasures of life.
Cathal is determined to make Fred sort out his life and it works. Fred modifies his car, beats the welfare system and makes a friend in Jules, an attractive music teacher who lives alone nearby. But Fred struggles with his pride to tell Jules about his 'home' and Cathal’s life is threatened by his escalating drug habit. As they grow closer, the influence of these three outsiders on each other will change their lives.
Fred's trust in Cathal was soon thwarted when he discovered Cathal injecting drugs into the veins of his feet. Cathal had sworn he had never injected, even showing Fred his arms as proof. Fred shouts at Cathal and then storms away to see Jules. While Fred is gone, Cathal is attacked by his drug dealer. Beaten and exhausted, Cathal sneaks into his dad's house, begging for money. His dad refuses to pay, and Cathal leaves. He then shows up at a bonfire with other drug addicts. They steal his shoes in exchange for a needle. Cathal injects himself in the arm and passes out.
Fred returns to find Cathal's car trashed and his treasured watch broken. He searches everywhere for Cathal, and eventually finds him in the mortuary. Cathal has died, but not before succeeding in improving Fred's life. Jules knows about Fred living in a car, and Fred is on the way to having a place of his own thanks to Cathal's persuasion. In the end, Cathal still managed to save Fred, though he couldn't do the same for himself.


== Cast ==
Colm Meaney as Fred Daly
A man who returns to Dublin and has nowhere to live but his car, after working in England for years.
Colin Morgan as Cathal O'Regan
A friendly young man who is a homeless drug addict, but becomes Fred's closest friend.
Milka Ahlroth as Juliana (Jules)
An attractive Finnish music teacher and widow, who Fred is attracted to.
Stuart Graham as George O'Regan
A distant father who blames his son Cathal for his wife's death.
Michael McElhatton as Frank
A drug dealer who is determined to get paid, no matter the means.


== Festivals ==
Mosaico European Film Festival 2011
Irish Film Festa Rome 2011
Tallinn Black Nights Film Festival 2011
Scanorama European Film Forum 2011
Mannheim-Heidelberg International Film Festival 2011
Busan International Film Festival 2011
San Francisco Irish Film Festival 2011
Irish Film New York 2011
Helsinki International Film Festival Love & Anarchy 2011
International Golden Boll Film Festival 2011
Galway Film Festival
Brussels Film Festival 2011
Newport Beach Film Festival 2011
Dallas International Film Festival 2011
Irish Film Festival Boston 2011
International Film Festival Rotterdam 2011
Göteborg International Film Festival 2011
Torino Film Festival 2010


== Awards and Nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Parked at the Internet Movie Database
Official website http://www.parkedmovie.com/