O Brother, Where Art Thou? is a 2000 adventure comedy film written, produced, edited, and directed by Joel and Ethan Coen, and starring George Clooney, John Turturro, and Tim Blake Nelson, with John Goodman, Holly Hunter, and Charles Durning in supporting roles. Set in 1937 rural Mississippi during the Great Depression, the film's story is a modern satire loosely based on Homer's epic poem, Odyssey. The title of the film is a reference to the 1941 film Sullivan's Travels, in which the protagonist (a director) wants to film a fictional book about the Great Depression called O Brother, Where Art Thou?
Much of the music used in the film is period folk music, including that of Virginia bluegrass singer Ralph Stanley. The movie was one of the first to extensively use digital color correction, to give the film an autumnal, sepia-tinted look. The film received positive reviews, and the American folk music soundtrack won a Grammy for Album of the Year in 2001. The original band soon became popular after the film release and the country and folk musicians who were dubbed into the film, such as John Hartford, Alison Krauss, Emmylou Harris, Gillian Welch, Chris Sharp, and others, joined together to perform the music from the film in a Down from the Mountain concert tour which was filmed for TV and DVD.


== Plot summaryEdit ==
Three convicts, Ulysses Everett McGill (George Clooney), known as Everett, Pete Hogwallop (John Turturro) and Delmar O’Donnel (Tim Blake Nelson) escape from a chain gang and set out to retrieve a supposed treasure Everett buried. The three get a lift from a blind man driving a handcar on a railway. He tells them that they will find a fortune, but not the one they seek. The trio make their way to Pete’s cousin Wash’s house. They remove their chains and sleep in the barn, but Wash betrays them and they are woken by policemen led by Sheriff Cooley, who have them surrounded. The police try to smoke them out, but Wash’s son rescues them.
The group set out for the valley again. While driving past a lonely crossroads, they pick up a young black man, Tommy Johnson, who claims that he sold his soul to the devil in exchange for the ability to play guitar. In need of money, the four of them make their way to a radio broadcast tower where they record a song for the radio as the Soggy Bottom Boys. Soon after this, they part ways with Tommy. Unbeknownst to them, the recording becomes a major hit.
The group is driving near a river when they hear a song. They rush down to the river, where three beautiful women are washing clothes and singing a bewitching song ("Go To Sleep Little Baby"); after drugging them with corn whiskey the men lose consciousness. The women correspond to The Sirens in The Odyssey. Upon waking, Delmar finds Pete’s clothes lying next to him, empty except for a toad. Delmar is convinced that the Sirens "loved him up" and transformed Pete into the toad. Later, one-eyed Bible salesman Daniel "Big Dan" Teague mugs them and kills the toad.
The two arrive in Everett's home town. He goes to confront his wife Penny about changing her last name and telling his daughters that he was hit by a train. He gets into a fight with Vernon T. Waldrip, his wife’s new “suitor.” After this incident, he and Delmar are in a cinema when a chain gang is marched in. Pete is part of the chain gang and warns them not to seek the treasure. Later that night, they rescue Pete from prison, and he tells them that he gave away the treasure’s location to the police. When Delmar tells Pete about the "toad" episode, Pete responds that the only thing the Sirens turned him into was to the authorities, in return for the same bounty Pete's cousin would have received. Everett then concludes he and Delmar would have shared the same fate had the Sirens returned before they left the river. Everett also reveals that there was never any treasure - it was a simply an excuse to help justify their escape. In reality he was imprisoned for practicing law without a license. Everett continues that he had just learned that his wife was planning to remarry and he had to figure out how to stop the wedding. He explains that escaping alone would have been impossible, Pete and Delmar just happened to be chained to Everett, which is why they all escaped together. Pete had just expressed remorse for betraying his friends when he told the authorities about the treasure, but now becomes outraged at this, and the two get into a fight. During the scuffle they stumble upon a Ku Klux Klan lynch mob. Tommy is being held prisoner and the Klansmen are going to hang him. The trio attempt to rescue Tommy, but Big Dan, a Klan member, reveals their identities. Chaos ensues, and the ‘Grand Wizard’ reveals himself as Homer Stokes, a candidate in the upcoming election. The trio rush Tommy away and cut the supports of a large burning cross. The cross falls on Big Dan, presumably killing him.
Everett convinces Pete, Delmar and Tommy to help him win his wife back. They sneak into a dinner that she is attending, disguised as musicians. Everett tries to convince his wife that he is 'bona fide', but she brushes him off. The group begins a performance of their radio hit. The crowd recognises them as the Soggy Bottom Boys and goes wild. Homer Stokes, on the other hand, recognises them as the group who disgraced his mob. He shouts angrily for the music to stop. After he reveals his white supremacist views, the crowd drives him out on a rail. Pappy O’Daniel, the incumbent candidate, seizes the opportunity and endorses the Soggy Bottom Boys. Upon learning of their fugitive status, he grants them all full pardons. Penny accepts Everett, but she demands that he find her original ring if they are to be married.
The group sets out to retrieve the ring, which is at a cabin in the valley where Everett originally claimed to have hidden the treasure. When they arrive the police arrest them, and Sheriff Cooley is not convinced by their claims of receiving pardons. The valley floods and they are saved from hanging. Everett finds the ring in a desk that is floating on the new lake, and they return to town. However, when Everett presents the ring to his wife she tells him it’s the wrong one, and demands that he get her ring back.


== CastEdit ==
George Clooney as Ulysses Everett McGill, a man who is imprisoned for practicing law without a license. He claims to have escaped from prison so he can find a stash of money he had hidden, though in reality it is so he can get back to his family before his wife remarries. He corresponds to Odysseus (Ulysses) in the Odyssey.
John Turturro, as Pete Hogwallop, a fellow criminal who reveals little about his past. He believes in being true to one's kin, even when his cousin Washington B. Hogwallop betrays him. He dreams of moving out west and opening a fine restaurant, where he will be the maître d'. He agreed to go along with the breakout, though he only had two weeks left on his sentence.
Tim Blake Nelson as Delmar O'Donnell, a small-time crook imprisoned for robbing a Piggly Wiggly in Yazoo City; he at first claims innocence, but later admits he is guilty. Delmar says he will spend his share of Everett's nonexistent money buying back his family farm, believing, "You ain't no kind of man if you ain't got land."
Chris Thomas King as Tommy Johnson, a skilled blues musician. He is the accompanying guitarist in the Soggy Bottom Boys. He claims he sold his soul to the devil in exchange for his skill on guitar. Tommy Johnson was a real-life blues musician who made this very claim.
Frank Collison as Washington B. "Wash" Hogwallop, Pete's paternal cousin. He removes the chains off Pete and the others, but later attempts to turn them into the police.
John Goodman as Daniel "Big Dan" Teague, a one-eyed man who masquerades as a Bible salesman and mugs Everett. Later, he reveals the identity of the trio when they are disguised at a Ku Klux Klan rally, but they kill him by cutting loose a burning cross that falls onto him and the Klansmen. He corresponds to the cyclops Polyphemus in the Odyssey.
Holly Hunter as Penny Wharvey-McGill, Everett's ex-wife; a demanding woman, she is fed up with Everett's wheeling and dealing, and divorces him while he is in prison, telling their children that he was hit by a Louisville & Nashville train. She is engaged to Vernon T. Waldrip until Everett wins her back. She corresponds to Penelope in the Odyssey.
Charles Durning as Menelaus "Pappy" O'Daniel, the incumbent Governor of Mississippi. He is frequently seen berating his son and his campaign managers, who are depicted as simpletons. His character is based on Texas governor W. Lee "Pappy" O'Daniel. Flensted-Jensen elaborates on the connection between the fictional and the real Pappy O'Daniel. He corresponds to Menelaus in the Odyssey.
Daniel von Bargen as Sheriff Cooley, a ruthless rural sheriff who pursues the trio for the duration of the film. He eventually ambushes them after they have been pardoned by the governor; he intends to hang them regardless, but when the valley is flooded, he drowns with his men and dog. He fits Tommy Johnson's description of the devil in that his sunglasses look like "big empty eyes" and he travels with a bloodhound. He corresponds to Poseidon in the Odyssey and has been compared to Boss Godfrey in Cool Hand Luke.
Wayne Duvall as Homer Stokes, the reform candidate in the upcoming election for Governor. He travels the countryside with a dwarf, who depicts the "little man", and a broom, with which he promises to "sweep this state clean". He is secretly an Imperial Wizard in the Ku Klux Klan. He falsely identifies Everett, Pete, and Delmar as colored people because they were dirty.
Ray McKinnon as Vernon T. Waldrip, Penny's "bona fide" suitor. He is the manager of the Homer Stokes campaign. The character's name has been suggested to be a nod to novelist Howard Waldrop, whose novella A Dozen Tough Jobs is one of the inspirations behind the film. He corresponds to the Suitors of Penelope in the Odyssey.
Michael Badalucco as George Nelson, is portrayed as a bipolar bank robber who dislikes being called "Baby Face". In reality, George Nelson died three years earlier in 1934. Given the story takes place in 1937 (and as the real George Nelson died in a shootout known as the Battle of Barrington rather than by electric chair as suggested in the film), his appearance in the film is historically inaccurate.
Stephen Root as Mr. Lund, the blind radio station manager who records Everett's story in the song "Man of Constant Sorrow", and makes him known throughout the state. He corresponds to Homer.
Lee Weaver as the Blind Seer, a mysterious railroad man who accurately predicts the outcome of the trio's adventure, as well as several other incidents. He corresponds to Tiresias in the Odyssey.


== ProductionEdit ==
The idea of O Brother, Where Art Thou? arose spontaneously. Work on the script began long before the start of production in December 1997, and was at least half-written by May 1998. Despite the fact that Ethan described the Odyssey as "one of my favorite storyline schemes" neither of the brothers had read the epic and were only familiar with its content through adaptations and numerous references to the Odyssey in popular culture. According to the brothers, Nelson (who has a degree in classics from Brown University) was the only person on the set who had read the Odyssey.
The title of the film is a reference to the 1941 Preston Sturges film Sullivan's Travels, in which the protagonist (a director) wants to direct a film about the Great Depression called O Brother, Where Art Thou? that will be a "commentary on modern conditions, stark realism, the problems that confront the average man". Lacking any experience in this area, the director sets out on a journey to experience the human suffering of the average man, but is sabotaged by his anxious studio. The film has some similarity in tone to Sturges' film, including scenes with prison gangs and a black church choir. The prisoners at the picture show scene is also a direct homage to a nearly identical scene in Sturges' film.
Joel Coen revealed in a 2000 interview that he came to Phoenix, Arizona, to offer the lead role to Clooney. Clooney agreed to do the role immediately, without reading the script. He stated that he liked even the Coens' least successful films.
John Turturro, who plays Pete, had been a constant actor for the Coens. O Brother, Where Art Thou? was the fourth film of the brothers in which he has starred. Other actors in O Brother, Where Art Thou? who had worked previously with the Coens include John Goodman (three films), Holly Hunter (two), Michael Badalucco, and Charles Durning (in one film each).
One of the notable features of the film is its use of digital color correction to give the film a sepia-tinted look. Cinematographer Roger Deakins stated, "Ethan and Joel favored a dry, dusty Delta look with golden sunsets. They wanted it to look like an old hand-tinted picture, with the intensity of colors dictated by the scene and natural skin tones that were all shades of the rainbow."
This was the fifth film collaboration between the Coen Brothers and Deakins, and it was slated to be shot in Mississippi at a time of year when the foliage, grass, trees, and bushes would be a lush green. It was filmed near locations in Canton, Mississippi and Florence, South Carolina in the summer of 1999. After shooting tests, including film bipack and bleach bypass techniques, Deakins suggested digital mastering be used. Deakins subsequently spent 11 weeks fine-tuning the look, mainly targeting the greens, making them a burnt yellow and desaturating the overall image timing the digital files. This made it the first feature film to be entirely color corrected by digital means, narrowly beating Nick Park's Chicken Run.
O Brother, Where Art Thou? was the first time a digital intermediate was used on the entirety of a first-run Hollywood film which otherwise had very few visual effects. The work was done in Los Angeles by Cinesite using a Spirit DataCine for scanning at 2K resolution, a Pandora MegaDef to adjust the color, and a Kodak Lightning II recorder to put out to film.
A major theme of the film is the connection between old-time music and political campaigning in the Southern U.S. It makes reference to the traditions, institutions, and campaign practices of bossism and political reform that defined Southern politics in the first half of the 20th century.
The Ku Klux Klan, at the time a political force of white populism, is depicted burning crosses and engaging in ceremonial dance. The character Menelaus "Pappy" O'Daniel, the Governor of Mississippi and host of the radio show The Flour Hour, is similar in name and demeanor to W. Lee "Pappy" O'Daniel, one-time Governor of Texas and later U.S. Senator from that state. W. Lee O'Daniel was in the flour business, and used a backing band called the Light Crust Doughboys on his radio show. In one campaign, W. Lee O'Daniel carried a broom, an oft-used campaign device in the reform era, promising to sweep away patronage and corruption. His theme song had the hook, "Please pass the biscuits, Pappy", emphasizing his connection with flour.
While the film borrows from real-life politics, differences are obvious between the characters in the film and historical political figures. The O'Daniel of the movie used "You Are My Sunshine" as his theme song (which was originally recorded by real-life Governor of Louisiana James Houston "Jimmie" Davis) and Homer Stokes, as the challenger to the incumbent O'Daniel, portrays himself as the "reform candidate", using a broom as a prop.


== MusicEdit ==

Music in the film was originally conceived as a major component of the film, not merely as a background or a support. Noted producer and musician T-Bone Burnett worked with the Coens while the script was still in its working phases, and the soundtrack was recorded before filming commenced. Burnett in turn consulted with famed Los Angeles music historian Alan Larman.

Much of the music used in the film is period-specific folk music, including that of Virginia bluegrass singer Ralph Stanley. The musical selection also includes religious music, including Primitive Baptist and traditional African American gospel, most notably the Fairfield Four, an a cappella quartet with a career extending back to 1921 who appear in the soundtrack and as gravediggers towards the film's end. Selected songs in the film reflect the possible spectrum of musical styles typical of the old culture of the American South: gospel, delta blues, country, swing and bluegrass.
The notable use of dirges and other macabre songs is a theme that often recurs in Appalachian music ("O Death", "Lonesome Valley", "Angel Band", "I Am Weary") in contrast to bright, cheerful songs ("Keep On the Sunny Side", "In the Highways") in other parts of the film.
The voices of the Soggy Bottom Boys were provided by Dan Tyminski (lead vocal on "Man of Constant Sorrow"), Nashville songwriter Harley Allen, and the Nashville Bluegrass Band's Pat Enright. The three won a CMA Award for Single of the Year and a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals, both for the song "Man of Constant Sorrow". Tim Blake Nelson sang the lead vocal on "In the Jailhouse Now".
"Man of Constant Sorrow" has five variations: two are used in the film, one in the music video, and two in the soundtrack album. Two of the variations feature the verses being sung back-to-back, and the other three variations feature additional music between each verse. Though the song received little significant radio airplay, it reached #35 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart in 2002. The version of "I'll Fly Away" heard in the film is performed not by Krauss and Welch (as it is on the CD and concert tour), but by the Kossoy Sisters with Erik Darling accompanying on long-neck five-string banjo, recorded in 1956 for the album Bowling Green on Tradition Records.
Tommy, the lead guitarist of the Soggy Bottom Boys, is an intentional reference to the legend of Delta blues artist Tommy Johnson, who claimed to have sold his soul to the devil in return for blues fame. The same connection can be made to Robert Johnson, who was also reputed to have sold his soul to the Devil at a crossroads in return for musical skills. This attribution is supported when the boys pick up Tommy at a crossroads, "Cross Road Blues" being a signature song of Robert Johnson.


== ReceptionEdit ==
The film was a box office and commercial success, grossing $71,868,327 off its $26 million budget. The film received positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives it a score of 77% based on 147 reviews, with an average score of 7.1/10, making the film a "Certified Fresh" on the website's rating system. The film also holds an average score of 69/100 on Metacritic.
Roger Ebert gave two and a half out of four stars to the film, saying all the scenes in the film were "wonderful in their different ways, and yet I left the movie uncertain and unsatisfied".


== AwardsEdit ==
The film was selected into the main competition of the 2000 Cannes Film Festival.
The film also received two Academy Award nominations at the 73rd Academy Awards: Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Cinematography. Cinematographer Roger Deakins was recognized with both Academy Award and ASC Outstanding Achievement Award nominations for his work on the film.
For his portrayal of Ulysses Everett McGill, George Clooney received the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. The film was also nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy.


== The Soggy Bottom BoysEdit ==
The Soggy Bottom Boys, the musical group that the main characters form, serve as accompaniment for the film. The name is a homage to the Foggy Mountain Boys, a bluegrass band led by Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs. In the film, the songs credited to the band are lip-synched by the actors, except that Tim Blake Nelson does sing his own vocals on "In the Jailhouse Now". The actual musicians are Dan Tyminski (guitar and lead vocals), Harley Allen, and Pat Enright. The band's hit single is Dick Burnett's "Man of Constant Sorrow", a song that had already enjoyed much success in real life. After the film's release, the fictitious band became so popular that the country and folk musicians who were dubbed into the film, such as Ralph Stanley, John Hartford, Alison Krauss, Emmylou Harris, Gillian Welch, Chris Sharp, and others, all got together and performed the music from the film in a Down from the Mountain concert tour which was filmed for TV and DVD.


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==

O Brother, Where Art Thou? at the Internet Movie Database
O Brother, Where Art Thou? at AllMovie
O Brother, Where Art Thou? at Box Office Mojo
O Brother, Where Art Thou? at Rotten Tomatoes
Coenesque: The Films of the Coen Brothers
American Myth Today: O Brother, Where Art Thou? American Studies at the University of Virginia
Official website for the soundtrack