The Jeep Wrangler is a compact and mid-size (Wrangler Unlimited models) four-wheel drive off-road and sport utility vehicle (SUV), manufactured by Jeep, and is currently in its third generation. The Wrangler is not a direct descendant of the World War II Willys MB or Willys civilian Jeeps (Jeep CJ) of the mid-1940s through 1980s, later produced by Kaiser-Jeep and by American Motors (AMC), despite this common misconception, and as illustrated by the factory dash plaques affixed to the last Jeeps (CJ-7) produced, that read "Last of a Great Breed - This collectors edition CJ ends an era that began with the legendary Jeep of World War II".
Outwardly resembling the Jeep CJ-7, the Wrangler, which was formally announced on May 13, 1986, was based on a new set of design parameters. "The product philosophy behind the two vehicles" Francios Castaing (AMC VP of Product Engineering) explained, "is completely different". Just like the Willys MB and the Jeep CJ, Wranglers continue to use a separate body and frame (although of a new design), rigid live axles both front and rear, a fold-flat windshield, and can be driven without doors. But its suspension, drivetrain, and interior were borrowed from the new Cherokee (XJ) model. The Wrangler debuted in 1986 as a new model to fill the void left by the discontinuance of the famous Jeep model (CJ), was revised in 1996, and completely redesigned in 2007. In addition to the model name Wrangler, each model received a designation corresponding to its generation: YJ (1987–1995), TJ (1997–2006), TJU's (commonly known as LJ's- 2004–2006 Unlimited models, or YJL, in the Egyptian owners manual.), JKU (2007–present Unlimited models) and JK (2007–present). Foreign military versions of the Wrangler have carried the J8 designation which was initially dubbed TJL when first produced at Arab American Vehicle's Egyptian plant.
Jeep YJ models were manufactured between 1986 and 1992 at Brampton Assembly, and subsequently at the Toledo South Assembly plant. A major difference in the 1987-1995 models were the rectangular headlights, which reverted to rounded ones in the TJ and then JK versions. In 2006, Wrangler production was moved to Toledo Complex. Post-2006 Wranglers were set apart from their predecessors by the angle of the grille. In all previous models, the grille was flat and even with the front fenders. The newer Wrangler was constructed with a grille which angled out from the top, and then continued in a straight line from the midway point, toward the bottom. This decreased the hood length, while increasing the length of the fenders. In more recent models, this angle has been lowered more toward the bottom of the grille.
In Egypt, the YJ was produced as well as a long wheel-base version, dubbed LJ (or labeled as YJL in Egypt's Owners Manual), and which has retained the 2-door design. The YJL is considered as the first predecessor of the JK's long wheel-base by continuing as TJL (aka J8) which has directly inspired the JK's 4-door.


== YJ (1987–1995)Edit ==
The Jeep YJ, sold as the Wrangler in the United States, replaced the much-loved but slower-selling Jeep CJ in 1986 and was built in Brampton, Ontario, Canada, until the plant closed on April 23, 1992. Production was then moved to Toledo, Ohio, using the same plant that produced the Willys Jeeps during World War II. American Motors Corporation (AMC) had designed the new Jeep to be more comfortable on-road in an attempt to attract more daily drivers. It was a totally new design with a wider track, slightly less ground clearance, and more comfort. The YJ still had leaf spring suspension similar to that of the CJ - however the springs were wider, and the YJs sported trackbars and swaybars for improved handling. Despite the new grille, the body is very similar to that of the CJ7, and it is interchangeable with some major modifications. The YJ also was given a larger windshield over the CJ. The YJs are easily identifiable due to the rectangular headlights and the fact that the wiper blades rest on the windshield giving this version a distinctive look. The blades rested on the windshield due to the now wider arc of the blades to clean the larger windshield. These two changes were later removed when the TJ changes came about in 1996. 632,231 YJs were built through model year 1995, although YJs were still produced into mid-1996, bringing the total production number to 685,071 units. Despite its similar look to the Jeep (CJ) its design was new from the ground up and had more in common with the newer downsized Cherokee (XJ) model.
The YJ used a 2.5 L AMC 150 I4 or optional 4.2 L AMC 258 I6 until 1991. That year, a fuel-injected 180 hp (134 kW) 4.0 L AMC 242 variant replaced the 112 hp (84 kW) 4.2 L 258 CID straight-6. The NP207 transfer case was used only for 1987 and replaced by the NP231.
The roll cage was extended in 1992 to allow for rear shoulder belts, and anti-lock brakes were added as an option the next year. An automatic transmission option for 4-cylinder Wranglers came in 1994, along with a center high-mounted brake light.
In 1994, the slave cylinder on manual transmissions was moved outside of the transmission's bellhousing to allow for easier replacement, and in 1995 the Dana 30 larger U-joints were used [front axle U-joints (297x) and rear pinion U-joint (1330)]. For the 1992 model year, the YJ switched over to an electronic speedometer, outmoding the cable speedos on older YJs. 1995 was the only model year to have a fully galvanized frame and body.
There were no 1996 model year Jeep Wranglers. YJs produced in early 1996 were sold as 1995 model years, but featured a few new parts not seen on any earlier YJ. This included the new TJ bumpstops on the hood (rubber boots vs the traditional U-bars), reinforced tailgate hinges, and some even had rear TJ bumpers. Some also got the newly tuned I6 that was designed to run quieter in preparation for the TJ.
Top options for YJ were the same as those offered on TJ. A Soft top with "half doors", featuring soft plastic zipper windows came standard (windows could be removed completely from these doors). Full-frame doors with conventional glass windows were optional on soft-top models. Hard tops with rear wiper and defroster were optional, but came standard with full-framed doors. The YJ featured large mirrors with manually adjustable arms on half-door models, while full-framed doors received smaller adjustable mirrors with fixed arms (which were mounted further away from the door corner, compared to the larger-style mirrors). Depending on year and interior color, Jeeps could be had with the top colors in black, white, tan and gray. Roll-bar padding normally matched top color, with the exception of white tops.
Many vacation destinations implemented the YJ is their choice for pulling their boardwalk tram cars. For example, Ocean City, Maryland used white YJ Islander Editions that were slightly modified to pull a series of tram cars. Said Jeeps were powered by the 2.5L Power Tech I4 engine and automatic transmission. In 2003, use of these YJ's were discontinued and replaced by more traditional Tram Industries 6000 Series vehicles. In 2013, one of these vehicles caught fire and was replaced by a white 2013 JK Sport with the 3.6L Pentastar V6 and automatic transmission, once again modified to pull a series of tram cars. The town also announced that they would gradually be replacing all of their tram vehicles with Wrangler JK's, since they are the most cost-effective and economical vehicles, as well as the vehicles with the best turning radius that is required to complete the large turnaround at each end of the boardwalk.


=== PowertrainEdit ===


=== YJ Wrangler IslanderEdit ===
From 1988 to 1993 Jeep produced an options package known as the "Islander". Several colors were offered, such as Bright Red, Pacific Blue, Sunset Yellow, Teal, and White, and both engines were offered. Features of the package are as follows:
Body-color wheel flares and side steps
Sunset graphics on lower body and hood
Islander logo on front fenders and spare tire cover
Wrangler decals or embossments
Optional 20 gallon fuel tank
Gray interior and highback seats
Optional 5-spoke Alloy Wheels
Floor carpeting
Center console with cupholders
Full or half doors


=== YJ Wrangler RenegadeEdit ===

From 1991 until 1994, Jeep produced an options package on the YJ Wrangler listed as the "Renegade Decor Group". Vehicles were shipped as optioned Wranglers to American Specialty Cars (ASC) in the Detroit area, where the Renegade Decor Package was installed, then shipped back to Jeep for delivery to dealers. Renegades all have a small sticker on the driver's side door, right above the latch denoting the visit to ASC. Initially, all Renegades were White, Black, or Red. In 1992, Blue was added, in 1993, Bronze. The Renegade Decor Group was a $4,266.00 option over a base Wrangler in 1991 and included special alloy wheels, exclusive body flares, along with many other features.
Contents of the Renegade Decor Package
4.0 Liter (242 CID) I-6 Engine
30x9.5R15 LT OWL Wrangler A/T Tires
Exclusive 5-hole aluminum wheels, 8 inches wide
Full size spare tire
Highback seats with Trailcloth Fabric
Off-road gas shock absorbers
Power steering
Fog lamps (integrated into the front fenders)
Leather-wrapped steering wheel
Renegade striping (door letters)
Floor carpeting (full width, and on insides of body tub)
Floor mats, front
Extra capacity fuel tank (20 US gal.)
Color keyed fender flares with integrated bodyside steps
Front and rear bumperettes (plastic)
Center console with cup holders
Courtesy and engine compartment lights
Interval wipers
Glove box lock
A hardtop was a $923.00 option and came with a mandatory rear window defroster at $164.00. Although soft-top models came standard with "half doors", full framed doors with glass windows were an option, and as on all 6-cylinder Wranglers, air-conditioning was also an option. Renegades typically had the tilt steering wheel ($130.00) and an AM/FM/cassette stereo radio ($264.00). A column shift automatic was also an available option, but it was not popular.


=== Trim levelsEdit ===
North American YJ/Wranglers were available in the following standard trims.
Base: also referred to as "S" & "SE" at different points in the model run; first few years the back seat and rear bumperettes were optional, some years the 6cyl engine was an option, other years only the 4cyl was available in the "Base" model. An A/M radio (later A/M-F/M stereo) with two speakers came standard, as did high-back vinyl bucket seats and a heater and blower. An A/M-F/M stereo, cassette player, and air conditioning were optional. In 1987, a basic Wrangler Base cost $8,995 MSRP.
Laredo: Chrome grille, bumpers, and trim, hard top and hard full doors, tinted windows, faux leather interior, body color fender flares and alloy wheels. An A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player, rear speaker sound bar, air conditioning, rear removable bench seat, and high-back cloth bucket seats all came standard.'LAREDO' decals adorned the hood on both sides or on the lower front fenders as part of the side stripes.
Islander: See Islander
Sport: which featured "sport" graphics and, beginning in 1991, a 4.0 L 242 CID inline-6-cylinder engine. An A/M-F/M stereo with two speakers and a rear removable bench seat came standard. A cassette player, rear speaker sound bar, cloth high-back bucket seats, and air conditioning were optional.
Sahara: which came standard with most available options, including body color fender flares and steel wheels, also included with the Sahara edition are special green trail-cloth seats with storage pockets, interior door panels with pockets, front bumper mounted fog lamps, and plastic ends on the front bumper). An A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player, rear speaker sound bar, unique cloth-and-vinyl high-back bucket seats, rear removable bench seat, exterior color steel wheels, and air conditioning were all standard on this model.
Renegade: See Renegade. 'Sahara Edition' decals adorned both front fenders.
Rio Grande: Available in champagne gold, moss green, white, along with the rare colors aqua pearl metallic, and Bright Mango; with a Pueblo themed interior trim package. This trim was only available in 1995, and was added to spice up the base 4-cylinder Wrangler 'S' models

A cassette player, rear speaker sound bar, and cloth high-back bucket seats came standard, and air conditioning and alloy wheels were all available on this model. Red-and-orange 'Rio Grande' decals adorned both rear fenders.


== TJ (1997–2006)Edit ==
The YJ gave way to the TJ for the 1997 model year (note that there was no 1996 model year; the 1997 TJ was released in Spring 1996). This updated Wrangler featured a coil-spring suspension (based on that of the Jeep Grand Cherokee) for better ride and handling, and a return to the classic CJ's round headlamps. The engine is the same 4.0 L AMC 242 Straight-6 used in the Cherokee and Grand Cherokee. A 2.5 L AMC 150 Inline-4 engine was available on entry-level models until 2003 when the 2.4 L DOHC 4-cylinder engine previously used on the Chrysler PT Cruiser replaced it.
A right hand drive version of the TJ was available for export markets, and was also offered for sale to U.S. rural route postal carriers. The version offered to U.S. postal carriers was only available with an automatic transmission.

In 1999, the fuel tank became standard at 19 U.S. gallons (72 L; 16 imp gal) capacity. There were some changes between the 2002 and 2003 years. From 1997 to 2002, the side door mirrors were black metal framed mirrors; and from 2003 to 2006 they were plastic molded mirrors. The fit of hard and soft tops is slightly different, and the fabric and colors available changed from 2002 to 2003. In 2003, the 3-speed automatic transmission was replaced with a 4-speed automatic with overdrive. The overdrive can be turned off with a dash switch. The radio bezels went from a rectangle in 2002 to a rounded-edged rectangle in 2003. The sound bar inside was changed to sound pods. The interior seats also changed design from 2002 to 2003, going from a rounder model to one with a distinct separation between back and headrest areas. The standard skid plate was also revised for 2003 to make room for the Rubicon's bigger NV241OR transfer case. The change from the 30/32RH to the 42RLE also gained an additional skid plate.
This version of the Wrangler is also notable for being the last production vehicle to use AMC-related parts. The AMC Straight-4 engine was retired after the 2002 model year, and both the AMC Straight-6 engine and the door handles (the latter of which first appeared on AMC vehicles in the late 1960s) were retired along with this generation in 2006. Like the YJ Wrangler, the TJ Wrangler used both the AMC passenger car door handles as well as the larger door handles off the AMC-built Jeep CJ for higher-end models.


=== Trim levelsEdit ===
North American TJ/Wranglers were available in the following standard trims.
SE: 1997-2006 came standard with the 2.5 L from 1997-2002, and the 2.4 L from 2003-2006. The 4.0 L optional for 2005-2006. Standard features included an A/M-F/M stereo with two speakers (later, an A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player or single-disc CD player and four speakers), vinyl seats, and rear removable bench seat. This model was also available as a right-hand-drive (RHD) rural mail carrier model, which included right-hand-drive (RHD) and a flip-out front window for easy mail delivery.
X: 2002-2006 came standard with 4.0 L but with no Dana 44 rear axle option. Standard features included an A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player and four speakers (later, a CD player replaced the cassette player) but air conditioning was optional.
Sport: 1997-2006 came standard with 4.0 L and the Dana 35 rear axle. The Dana 44 rear axle, 3.73 axle ratio, and 30" wheel and tire group are optional. The Dana 44 could also be upgraded with a Trac-Lok limited slip differential case. Standard features were an A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player and four speakers and cloth seats.
Sahara: 1997-2004 came standard with 4.0 L, wider body colored fender flares, body colored rocker sills, optional 30" wheel and tire group and full steel doors. The Sahara also features exclusive decals, seats and trim. The Dana 44 rear axle and 3.73 axle ratio were optional. Standard features included an A/M-F/M stereo with cassette player and four speakers (later, a CD player replaced the cassette player, and seven premium speakers with center console-mounted subwoofer became standard), premium cloth seats, and alloy wheels. From 1997-2002, the seats were finished in a unique Camel/Forest Green color scheme.
60th Anniversary Edition: 2001 came standard with all the features of a Sahara except for the seats, decals and trim. It also came with the fog lamp and tow hook group, CD player with five-speaker sound system, air conditioning and unique 60th Anniversary Edition decals and floor mats. The only two options were speed control and dual tops. Only two colors were available, black or silverstone metallic. Only 4,067 were produced; 1,862 in black, 2,205 in silverstone.
65th Anniversary Edition: 2006 came standard with all the options of a Sahara but without the rocker sills, seats, decals and trim. It also came with fog lamps, CD player with 7 speaker sound system and Sirius Satellite Radio, SunRider soft top, 30" wheels with 15" Alcoa aluminum wheels, high pressure gas charged shocks, Dana 44 rear axle and exclusive 65th Anniversary Edition seats, trim, floor mats and decals.The available colors were light khaki, dark khaki, bright silver, black and Jeep Green. Only about 1600 were made.
Apex Edition: 2002-2003 came standard with the 4.0 L, CD player with 7 speaker sound system, and exclusive hood decal and seats. It only came in three colors silver, blue, or black. It also included standard features such as chrome-plated styled steel wheels and cognac-finished "Ultra-Hide" seats.
Columbia Edition: 2004 came standard with the 4.0 L, fog lamps, and graphite fender flares, 15-inch graphite painted aluminum wheels, two-tone seats with Columbia logo, unique trim and Columbia decals. It only came in five colors black, bright silver, flame red, solar yellow or partiot blue. Each of the unique jeeps came with a Columbia Bugaboo parka.
Freedom Edition: 2003 came standard with the 4.0 L, full metal doors, fog lamp and tow hook group, body colored fender flares, exclusive decals, chrome wheels air conditioning, anti-theft system, and fold and tumble rear seat. It only came in four colors red, silver, blue or black with either vinyl or cloth slate gray seats.
Golden Eagle: 2006 came standard with the 4.0 L, 30" Wheel and tire group, Dana 44 rear axle, exclusive hood, interior trim, seats, fender and spare tire decals.
Rocky Mountain Edition: 2003-2005 came standard with the 4.0 L, Dana 44 rear axle, 30" Wheel and tire group (with 15" Alcoa aluminum wheels), fog lamp and tow hook group, exclusive decals, fender flares, seats and interior trim and Diamond plate rocker guards. It only came in five colors black, silver, red, yellow and blue. It also included seven premium speakers with subwoofer, and unique cloth seats.
Sahara Edition Unlimited Rubicon: 2005, Paramount released the movie Sahara which featured a Jeep Wrangler. As a way to build on the success of the movie, Jeep released a limited production "Sahara Edition" Unlimited Rubicon. Only 1000 were produced and each one is numbered. All of them are visually identical, but some were offered in a manual and others an automatic. They are all Light Khaki Unlimiteds. Trim differences over the standard Rubicon include chrome grille, color matched flares, khaki hard top or soft top, as well as optional dual khaki tops, Graphite Moab wheels, a Sahara spare tire cover, upgraded two-tone premium seats, Sahara decals, taillight guards, and a numbered dash badge.
Rubicon Tomb Raider Edition: 2003 was a limited run of 1,001 (perhaps as many as 1,050) Wrangler Rubicon "Tomb Raider" models produced promote the Tomb Raider sequel, Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life. Along with the standard Rubicon fare, it also included exterior features such as 16-inch Alcoa forged aluminum wheels, Tomb Raider badging, and Mopar accessories including a light bar, riveted fender flares, tubular grille guard, diamond-plated bumper guard, etc. Interior features included Dark Slate fabric seats with red accent stitching down the center, silver surround instrument panel bezel, red seat belts, and a Tomb Raider badge with serial number. To match the vehicle in the film, it was offered in Bright Silver. Due to its classic styling, combined with numerous unique accessories, the 2003 "Tomb Raider" Limited Edition Wrangler Rubicon has become one of the most highly collectible jeeps of all-time.
Willys Edition: 2004-2005 came standard with the 4.0 L, fog lamp and tow hook group, exclusive "WILLYS" decals, CD player with 7 speaker sound system, body-color fender flares, green diamond plate rocker guards, camouflage seats, dark green soft top and full-size spare tire with matching wheel. It was only available in moss green. Only about 1000 were produced in 2004. A variation of the edition known as the 35X package, included everything except the military logos and optional moss green fog light covers and tail light guards.

Rubicon: The Wrangler Rubicon (named for the famed Rubicon Trail in the Sierra Nevada Mountains) was introduced in 2003. It featured front and rear Dana 44 axles with the Rock-Trac four-wheel drive system, diamond plate rocker panels, 16-inch alloy wheels, and Goodyear MTR P245/75-R16 tires. 2003 to 2004 featured a standard NV3550 five-speed manual transmission, which changed in 2005 to the NSG370, a Mercedes-sourced six-speed. The optional 42RLE four-speed automatic transmission was available from 2003 to 2006


=== TJ Wrangler UnlimitedEdit ===

In 2004 1/2, Jeep introduced the Wrangler Unlimited (unofficially dubbed "LJ") with a 10-inch (250 mm) longer wheelbase (LWB), a Dana 44 rear axle with a 3.73 gear ratio and the Command-Trac 231 transfer case. In 2005, Jeep released the Rubicon Unlimited, which has the wheelbase of the Unlimited and the off-road features of the Rubicon such as front and rear Dana 44 axles with the Rock-Trac four-wheel-drive system, diamond plate rocker guards, 245/75R16 Goodyear MT/R tires, a six-speed manual transmission and other comfort and convenience options not offered on other Wranglers. This model of the Jeep Wrangler has nearly double the towing capacity of its shorter wheelbase sibling, partly due to the increased wheelbase. (3500 lbs LJ vs 2000 lbs TJ)


=== PowertrainEdit ===


== JK (2007–present)Edit ==


=== Initial releaseEdit ===
The 2007 model year brought a complete redesign of the Jeep Wrangler, and also a four-door model. The TJ chassis was replaced by an all new JK platform. This next-generation Wrangler was noticeably wider than the previous model, with a 3.4-inch (86 mm) wider track; and though the two-door model has a 2-inch (51 mm) longer wheelbase, it is actually 2.5 inches (64 mm) shorter in overall length than the TJ, allowing for a 44.3° approach angle and a 40.4° departure angle. With a larger factory available tire size of 32 inches, the breakover angle on the Rubicon is increased from 22.6° to 25.4°.
The four-door Unlimited model has an over 20-inch (510 mm) longer wheelbase at 116 in (2,950 mm) to offer much improved rear seating room, but is nevertheless only 2.4-inch (61 mm) longer than the 2006 TJ Unlimited.
The Wrangler JK was introduced at the 2006 North American International Auto Show with past Chrysler group CEO Tom LaSorda driving one up some steps and through a plate glass window, just as Robert Lutz had done at the show in 1992 with the Grand Cherokee. The JK was first available for purchase with the 2007 model year.
The JK Wrangler has been offered from the start in two models:
A short-wheelbase 2-door, in X, Sahara and Rubicon trim levels.
A long-wheelbase Unlimited 4-door, also in X, Sahara and Rubicon trim levels.
The Wrangler X is available with factory installed right-hand drive, targeted at U.S. Mail carriers. Rural mail boxes in the United States are serviced with the carrier behind the wheel. This may also be useful for carriers who wish to get out of their vehicle without the risk of getting hit by traffic. For the 2007 and 2008 model years, the right-hand drive Jeep was the short-wheelbase Wrangler. For the 2009 model year, the right-hand drive Wrangler will be replaced by the right-hand drive Wrangler Unlimited.
Stability control is a new safety feature for the JK Wrangler. All versions offer off-road tuned Anti-lock braking system and traction control system with electronic limited slip differential. Standard on the Rubicon trim is a new electronic sway bar disconnect system.
The JK runs almost all vehicle functions, other than steering, under computer software control. Engine, transmission, and to some extent braking are computer controlled, as are lights and auxiliary systems. This is a first for the Wrangler. As of mid-2007, there have been three safety recalls for software fixes.
A Sunrider convertible soft top is standard equipment. Also available on the JK model is an optional 3-piece modular hardtop. Although the doors can still be removed in traditional Wrangler fashion, power windows and remote power door locks will be offered for the first time in a Wrangler. Another first is an available navigation system. This is the first generation of the Jeep Wrangler to have a change in the tail lamps.


==== JK Wrangler UnlimitedEdit ====

The JK series 2007 Wrangler Unlimited was unveiled at the New York Auto Show on April 12, 2006. It is stretched even more than the TJ model, and featured four doors. This change made it the last-remaining 2-door SUV in North America to gain a four-door option and made it the only four door convertible in production. A full 20.6 inches (523 mm) was added to the JK Wrangler's 95.4-inch (2423 mm) wheelbase. It hit production line in August 2006 and was priced near $21,000.
The Unlimited has the same engine and transmission choices as a short-wheelbase JK. X and Sahara trims offer an option of 4x2 rear-wheel drive in the USA. Optional 4x2 was discontinued after the 2010 model year for the Unlimited. 4-wheel drive became standard for the 2011 model year. It is the only four-door convertible available in the US, since the Hummer H1 with optional rag-top is no longer sold.
The Unlimited offers more options and equipment than any previous Wrangler model, including standard electronic stability program and optional seat-mounted side airbags, remote keyless entry, navigation system, and Sirius Satellite Radio. The navigation and satellite systems are a part of the MyGig Entertainment system that also has a hard drive allowing for the storage of MP3 music files and pictures.


==== J8 (2007-)Edit ====

On September 13, 2007, at the Defence Systems and Equipment International trade show, Chrysler LLC unveiled a Wrangler Unlimited version designed for military use dubbed the J8. The unarmored Jeep J8 is equipped with larger brakes, axles and suspension components than the civilian version and has a payload capacity of 1,339 kg (2,952 lb). The J8 also differs from the civilian model by utilizing heavy-duty rear leaf springs for carrying heavier payloads. The Jeep J8 is powered by a VM 2.8-liter (169 CID) four-cylinder turbo-diesel engine that produces 118 kW (158 hp) and 400 N·m (295 lbf·ft) of torque, providing towing capability of up to 3,500 kg (7,700 lb). The engine is mated to a five-speed automatic transmission. The J8 also features a unique air-intake system with special filtration and a hood-mounted snorkel that enables the J8 to wade in water up to 762 mm (30 in) deep and tackle sandstorm conditions for up to five hours. Available as a two-door with an extended pickup bed for personnel or equipment transport, or a four-door multipurpose vehicle, it may be produced with numerous vehicle-body and seating configurations in either right-hand- or left-hand-drive. Targeted for use by the militaries in overseas markets, the J8 is not available in the United States because it will not meet U.S. emissions requirements. The J8 will be produced in Egypt.


==== JK trim levelsEdit ====

The Standard Wranglers are available in six trim packages (including 2 special editions). The Unlimited Wranglers are available in four trim packages (including 1 special edition). Most packages can be ordered with either hard or soft top, full or half doors("Sport" and "Rubicon" only).
The Sport base model is available in 2-door versions. It is the "bare bones" Wrangler that can be customized to a buyer's specifications by adding such options as air conditioning and other accessories. It was originally called the "Wrangler X" until 2009. Later, stain-resistant YES Essentials cloth seats replaced standard vinyl seats, an A/M-F/M stereo with single-disc CD/MP3 player and auxiliary audio input jack, and full-sized spare tire and wheel came standard on this model.
The X-S model features 32-inch tires (on 17-inch wheels), air conditioning, fog lights, cruise control, driver’s seat height adjuster, removable doors, and a fold-down windshield. It can be customized to a buyers specifications adding such options as power windows and locks, soft or hard top, rear LSD or locker(2007 only), and other accessories. It was renamed "Sport S" in 2009. Advantages over the Sport included standard air conditioning, alloy wheels, matching spare tire and wheel, YES essentials stain-resistant cloth seats, optional U Connect touch-screen radios, optional seven-speaker premium sound system with subwoofer, and optional power equipment, such as power door locks and power windows, a first on any Wrangler model.
The Sahara model is the "luxury" model offering accessories such as body colored fenders, "Yes Essentials" seats (in late 2007–2008), power windows and locks and a 7 speaker infinity sound system with subwoofer, among others. It also offered exterior-color fender flares and a gold 'SAHARA' decal on both front fenders.

The Rubicon is the "off-road ready" model, offering 32in BF Goodrich Mud-Terrain KM off-road tires with aggressive tread, seventeen-inch alloy wheels, and more. 'RUBICON' decals adorned both sides of the hood.
The Rubicon package is the dedicated "Offroad" package. Standard components of the Rubicon package include front and rear next generation Dana 44 axles with electric lockers, Rock-Trac four-wheel drive with 4:1 transfer case, rock rails, 32-spline rear axle with an 8.8-inch ring gear, 4.10 axle gearing, electric releasing sway bar, "Yes Essentials" seats (2007–08), 7-speaker infinity sound system, removable doors, a fold-down windshield, and any other available option can be added.


=== 2009 model year updateEdit ===
The 2009 model added standard Hill Start Assist (HSA) to prevent rollback on graded surfaces. Trailer Sway Control (TSC) also is available to monitor vehicle movement relative to the intended path and activates the Electronic Stability Program (ESP) if the trailer begins to sway outside set parameters. Additionally, ULEV II emissions replace LEV II emissions on manual transmission equipped vehicles.


==== Rocky Mountain EditionEdit ====
The Rocky Mountain Edition is a special edition of the "X" model that was made for 2009 with 32-inch tires (on 18-inch wheels), black tubular sidestep, a 6-disc in-dash changer and visual enhancements such as body colored fenders were optional.


=== 2010 faceliftEdit ===

The 2010 model added a new easier-to-fold/open soft top, standard UConnect on models equipped with the MyGig radio, and new sun visors that offer more coverage than the old models, as well as integrated vanity mirrors.


==== Islander EditionEdit ====

The Islander Edition is a special edition of the "Sport Base" model made in 2010 with 32-inch tires, Islander edition seats, rubber slush mats, black tubular sidestep and visual enhancements such as a blue accented leather steering wheel.


==== Mountain EditionEdit ====

The Mountain Edition is a special edition of the "Sport Base" model made for 2010 with 32-inch tires (on 17-inch wheels), black tubular sidestep, black tail light protectors and special edition seats, as well as visual enhancements like black grid and hood decals, a black fuel filler door and graphite dash enhancements. This edition was also available in 4 doors, based on the more equipped "Sport" trim instead of the "Sport Base" trim.


=== 2011 model year updateEdit ===

The 2011 model added a new steering wheel, as well as a completely redesigned interior with higher quality materials, larger rear windows to increase rear visibility, and a new USB interface with Bluetooth audio streaming. For the first time ever, automatic temperature controls were also added to the Wrangler as an option. The redesign was intended to provide a more refined interior as well as directly addressing interior comfort in noise and temperature.


==== 70th Anniversary Edition (MY2011)Edit ====
The 70th Anniversary Edition is a special package based on the Sahara model to commemorate the 70th model year of the Wrangler. This package is available for the 2011 model year on both Wrangler and Wrangler Unlimited models. Features include: Black/Dark Olive (or Black) leather seats with perforated leather inserts and Chestnut accent stitching and piping, Leather steering wheel with Chestnut accents, Berber floor mats with Chestnut binding, Mopar brushed aluminum sill plates, Door armrest and center console in Dark Olive (or Black) with Chestnut accent, Unique 18-inch polished wheels, Automatic shift knob with satin chrome cap and bezel, Satin chrome HVAC rings, front doorpulls and grab handle, 70th Anniversary logo on radio screen, Unique cluster overlay and needles, and 70th Anniversary badges throughout.


=== 2012 model year updateEdit ===


==== Jeep Wrangler 3.6-liter Pentastar V-6, Jeep Wrangler ArcticEdit ====
The 2012 model, as confirmed by Chrysler CEO Sergio Marchionne during the 2010 third-quarter sales announcement, received a version of Chrysler's newest V-6 engine known as Pentastar. The version used in the 2012 Wrangler and Wrangler Unlimited produces 285 horsepower and 260 lb-ft of torque. Fuel economy for the 2-door model is rated at 17 mpg City / 21 mpg Highway.
Jeep Wrangler Arctic is based on Jeep Wrangler Sahara, with Arctic badge, decal recall the Yeti, unique black 17-inch wheels, original Mopar accessories, 3.6-liter Pentastar V-6 petrol engine with the automatic five-speed transmission or 2.8-liter turbo diesel engine with a six-speed manual or five-speed automatic transmission.
The vehicles were unveiled in 64th International Frankfurt Motor Show.
European models of Jeep Wrangler were introduced in Jeep dealerships starting November 2011. Early models include Sport, Sahara and Rubicon trim levels of Jeep Wrangler and Wrangler Unlimited. Arctic model were introduced in Jeep dealerships in the first quarter of 2012 (for Jeep Wrangler and Wrangler Unlimited).


==== Call of Duty: MW3 Special Edition (2012)Edit ====

A version of 2012 model year Jeep Wrangler and Wrangler Unlimited Rubicon inspired by Activision's Call of Duty video games was available. Equipment included Rubicon wheels finished in semi-gloss black, black, or bright silver body color, "Call of Duty: MW3 Special Edition" graphics on the front fenders and spare tire cover, a unique "power-dome" hood; a winch-ready front bumper, rear bumper, rock rails, taillamp guards and a fuel-filler door from Mopar accessories; 32-inch off-road tires, live axles with locking differentials in the front and rear, a two-speed transfer case, model-specific black seats with accent stitching and "Call of Duty" logos, unique gauge cluster graphics, dashboard serialized plaque, dashboard grab handle with logo, accent stitching on arm rest, console lid, and steering wheel, as well as Mopar slush floor mats and a rear cargo mat (Unlimited only) with logos.
The vehicles arrived at Jeep showrooms in November 2011.


==== EquipmentEdit ====
Mopar produced over 250 accessories for 2012 Jeep Wrangler.


=== 2013 model year updateEdit ===

The Wrangler series have received the following update/improvements; newly contoured seats and trim, a lever for one-handed rear-seat folding (previously a two-handed operation), ambient cabin lighting, and the triumphant return of a second windshield washer nozzle.


==== 2013 Moab editionEdit ====
Similar to the 2012 "Call of Duty" version, it was named in recognition of the mountainous Utah east-central region that plays host to the annual Moab Easter Jeep Safari. The newest addition to the Wrangler lineup was aimed to bridge the gap between Rubicon and Sahara style.
Available for both Wrangler models, the Moab’s uniqueness was its distinguishing exterior features which included the steel bumpers front and rear from AEV (less the winch plate), rock sliders on the sills, tail light guards, front skid plate, black fuel filler door and a modified sculpted hood also from AEV (no heat vent). Color choice was limited to black, white, and a quartet of signature hues: Gecko, Dozer, Crush, and Rock Lobster with fender flares in matte black only.
Other components and options were as follows: A limited-slip rear differential is standard and a locking unit is optional, 32" Goodyear Silent Armor tires on black-painted versions of the same wheels found on the 2013 Rubicon, Wrangler’s standard 2.72:1 transfer case (no option for a Rubicon 4:1), a soft canvas top cut from the same cloth as the Chrysler 200 Convertible’s and optional color matching hard top.


==== ProductionEdit ====
The 2013 Jeep Wrangler and Jeep Wrangler Unlimited are built in the Toledo Supplier Park in Toledo, Ohio.
As of May 17, 2013, Chrysler Group's Toledo (Ohio) Assembly Complex produced its one-millionth JK model, a 2013 Jeep Wrangler Rubicon 10th Anniversary Edition, to be delivered to a customer in Sarasota, Florida.


==== MarketingEdit ====
As part of 2013 Jeep Wrangler Rubicon 10th Anniversary Edition launch, the Jeep X Games Avalanche Scramble sweepstakes campaign featured a 2013 Jeep Wrangler Rubicon 10th Anniversary Edition grand prize and 3 'X Games Aspen 2013' prizes.


=== 2014 model year updateEdit ===


==== Wrangler, Rubicon Edition, X Edition, Polar Edition, Freedom Edition, Willys Wheeler Edition, Dragon EditionEdit ====
Changes to Jeep Wrangler include a new Trail Kit (two D-rings, a tow strap, gloves and a bag to store the items), clear park lamps and turn signal indicators replace the amber units, 6 new body colors (Amp’d, Anvil, Copperhead, Flame Red, Granite Crystal and Hydro Blue (Freedom Edition only)) for total of 10.
Changes to Sport models include the introduction of optional Uconnect 6.5-inch touchscreen radio with hard drive storage and SiriusXM Radio, optional 32-inch Tire and Wheel Group (semi-gloss black 17-inch Rubicon aluminum wheels, BF Goodrich KM LT255/75R17 off-road tires).
Available as a two-door Wrangler or four-door Wrangler Unlimited, the Rubicon X is a version of Rubicon with electronic-locking front and rear Dana 44 axles, Rock-Trac transfer case with a "4-Low" ratio of 4:1, 4.10 front/rear axle ratio Tru-Lok locking differentials, six-speed manual transmission, BF Goodrich KM 255/75R17 tires, 17-inch Rubicon aluminum wheels painted satin black with polished faces and a red Jeep Wrangler 'icon' logo on the inside pocket, black front and rear steel off-road bumpers, front steel bumper featuring removable end caps and a winch-capable design, a dual-intake Power Dome hood, red tow hooks, Mopar rock rails, Mopar black fuel filler door, a red-silhouette "Rubicon" decal on both sides of the hood, Premium Sunrider soft top (optional black three-piece Freedom hard top or body-color hard top), Black leather seats, seat heaters for the front passengers, a unique gauge cluster features Rubicon X exclusive styling and a premium Electronic Vehicle Information Center (EVIC) with added read-outs such as oil pressure, transmission and coolant temperatures, digital speed and individual tire pressure; passenger grab handle with Quick Silver accents that are also found on the vent rings, steering wheel spokes and door pulls; Mopar slush mats, unique axle locker, sway-bar disconnect switches.
New limited edition trim packages include the Wrangler Dragon edition, which includes a black three-piece hard top, Bronze Satin Gloss paint with Dragon decals, and unique 18 inch wheels and front fascia. Jeep introduced the Polar Edition Wrangler in 2014 which was available in 2-door and 4 door and came in three distinct colors; Hydro Pearl Blue, Billet Silver Metallic, and Bright White. In addition to the new colors, the Polar Edition came with options including automatic climate control and heated seats to supplement the black leather seats. The Polar Edition has some similarities to the Sahara such as body colored fender flares and also came standard with a body colored hard top. The Polar Edition is equipped with a standard Trac-Lok limited slip rear differential and offer an electronic locking rear differential as an option. A new Freedom Edition is a modified Wrangler sport with 3 unique body colors (Hydro Blue, Billet Silver, and Black and Dune. The package includes a Mineral Gray painted grille, a unique interior and exterior with "Oscar Mike" badging throughout, body colored fenders with silver-painted 17 inch alloy wheels, and rock rails with black tail lamp guards. The interior includes black seats with tectonic fabric, and a French Silver accent stitching steering wheel.
European models were set to go on sale in the first quarter of 2014. UK models include only 2.8-litre turbo diesel engine with automatic transmission.


==== EquipmentEdit ====
New Mopar Jeep Performance Parts and Accessories included 2014 Jeep Wrangler Trail Rated Kit, 4:10 Dana 44 front and rear axles (for 2007-2014 Wrangler), Hardtop Headliner (for 2007 and later Wrangler), Black Grille (with hood seal and a matching black Jeep badge), Side Visor.


=== 2015 model year updateEdit ===
Changes for 2015 include the usual new paint colors and trim packages, as well as a new standard eight-speaker audio system, a new nine-speaker system that includes a subwoofer, a package that bundles steel wheels with 31-inch tires for Sport models, and a Torx tool set that's standard on all models, allowing owners to remove the windshield or doors wherever they are.


=== PowertrainEdit ===
A 3.8 L EGH V6 with a displacement of 230.5 cubic inches (3,778 cc) producing 202 hp (151 kW) and 237 pound force-feet (321 N·m) of torque was the base engine in 2007 -2011 models. It replaced the venerable AMC 242 straight-6.
The 2.8 L VM Motori turbodiesel straight-4 producing 177 hp (132 kW) and 302 pound force-feet (409 N·m) of torque used in the Liberty is offered as options outside of U.S., as it does not satisfy U.S. emission control standards for 2007.
A six-speed manual transmission is standard, with a four-speed automatic transmission offered as an option. The lower two levels have the Jeep Command-Trac part-time four-wheel drive system with an optional Trac-Loc limited-slip differential, while the Rubicon uses Rock-Trac a version of the NV241 with a 4:1 low range. Electronic locking front- and rear-axles called Tru-loc are also standard on Rubicon models. (A rear locking differential was optional on X and Sahara models for 2007, then only on select X models for 2008 and 2009. From 2010 onward, the locking differential is not available on any non-Rubicon Wrangler.)


== RecognitionEdit ==
The Jeep Wrangler received the 2009 Best Resale Value Award from Kelley Blue Book (KBB) in the sport utility vehicle category. In 2012 and for 2013, it was also awarded the Best Resale Value Award from Kelly Blue Book in the compact sport utility vehicle category. The Wrangler also holds the Models to Best Hold Its Value recognition from Kelley Blue Book for 1998, 1999, 2003, 2011, and 2012.
The 2011, 2012, and 2013 Jeep Wranglers have received Canadian Black Book's Best Retained Value Award for the compact SUV category.
In 2007, The Jeep Wrangler has set the Guinness World Record for highest altitude attained by a four-wheeled vehicle after ferrying Matthias Jeschke and his Extrem Events adventure team up Chile's Ojos del Salado, the highest volcano on Earth. The trek from base camp to the world record height ran from March 7 to March 13, when the team's pair of Wrangler Rubicon Unlimiteds checked in at 6,646 meters, or 21,804 feet.
In 2007 and for 2013, the magazine Four Wheeler awarded the Jeep Wrangler with its Four-Wheeler of the Year Award and in January 2010, they awarded the Jeep Wrangler Unlimited Rubicon its title of 4x4 of the Decade.
In 1997, 2007, and 2012, the magazine Petersen's 4-Wheel & Off-Road awarded the Jeep Wrangler with its 4x4 of the Year award.
The 2008 edition of Forbes Autos lists the four-wheel-drive convertible Jeep Wrangler at number four among the top ten vehicles with the highest resale value.
In May 2009, Business Week magazine named the Wrangler One of the Most Iconic Cars of the Last 20 Years.


=== Electric WranglerEdit ===

In September 2008, Chrysler Vice Chairman Tom LaSorda unveiled a range-extended electric 4-door Wrangler along with similarly engineered Town and Country minivan and a purely electric sports car. The Wrangler would have a 40-mile (64 km) range before a gas engine starts and begins supplying additional electricity. However, in November 2009 Fiat SpA disbanded Chrysler's ENVI electric car division and dropped these models from future product plans.


== SalesEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Jeep Wrangler Official Website
Jeep Wrangler Unlimited Official website
Jeep Government & Military Sales
Jeep Wrangler Mods