Berserk: The Golden Age Arc (Japanese: ベルセルク 黄金時代篇, Hepburn: Beruseruku Ōgon Jidai-hen) is a series of films, an effort to adapt the Golden Age Arc of Kentaro Miura's Berserk manga series. The project was first announced as a new anime project in September 2010 on a wraparound jacket band on volume 35 of the Berserk manga. The first two films, Berserk: The Golden Age Arc I - The Egg of the King and Berserk: The Golden Age Arc II - The Capture of Doldrey, were released in Japan in February and June 2012, with the third film, Berserk: The Golden Age Arc III - The Advent, released in February 2013. The third film also marks the first time new footage based on the manga has been animated beyond the storyline of the TV show. Viz Media has licensed all three films for a home video release. The first film was released on (DVD/Blu-ray) November 27, 2012, the second on August 6, 2013, and the third on April 15, 2014 in the United States.
The Japanese voice cast features Hiroaki Iwanaga as Guts (replacing Nobutoshi Canna from the original anime), Takahiro Sakurai as Griffith (replacing Toshiyuki Morikawa), and Toa Yukinari as Casca (replacing Yuko Miyamura). The English voice cast features Marc Diraison as Guts, Kevin T. Collins as Griffith, and Carrie Keranen as Casca, all reprising their roles from the original anime.


== Films ==


=== The Egg of the King ===
Berserk: Golden Age Arc I - The Egg of the King (ベルセルク 黄金時代篇I 覇王の卵, Beruseruku Ōgon Jidai-hen Wan Haō no Tamago) was released on February 4, 2012 in Japan.
Guts, a mercenary, attracts the attention of the Band of Hawks and is forced into joining the group after being defeated by its leader Griffith twice. Once the Band of Hawks defeated the kingdom of Chuder's Black Sheep Iron Spears Heavy Knights, they are recruited by Midland for its war against the rival kingdom. During one siege, Guts and Griffith encounter the demon Nosferatu Zodd the Immortal, who notices the Behelit around Griffith's neck and warns Guts that Griffith will be his doom. In time, Griffith's gradually rise in status is ill-received by the noblemen as a failed assassination attempt by Yurius results in his murder by Guts, who was also forced to kill the noble's son Adonis to leave no witnesses. Guts, emotionally scarred by what he has done, would later hear Griffith discussing his idea of friendship with the Midland Princess Charlotte and is further unsettled.


=== The Battle for Doldrey ===
Berserk: Golden Age Arc II - The Battle for Doldrey (ベルセルク 黄金時代篇II ドルドレイ攻略, Beruseruku Ōgon Jidai-hen Tsū Dorudorei Koryaku) was released on June 23, 2012 in Japan.
For three years, Guts believed his mission was to pursue Griffith's dream together with him. But after coming to understand Griffith's outlook, Guts realizes that would need to leave the Band of the Hawk to become Griffith's equal and truly be called his friend.. At the same time, a bloody battle to capture the impenetrable Fortress of Doldrey from the Chuder Empire's army of 30,000 strong. Guts parts way with Griffith once the battle is resolved, the latter not taking his former ally's departure well as he ends up being imprisoned in the Tower of Rebirth after being caught sleeping with Charlotte in a lapse of judgment.


=== The Descent ===
Berserk: Golden Age Arc III - The Descent (ベルセルク 黄金時代篇III 降臨, Beruseruku Ōgon Jidai-hen Surī Kōrin) was released on February 1, 2013 in Japan. It was released as Berserk: Golden Age Arc III - The Advent for western audiences.
A year after leaving the Band of Hawks, learning they have been labeled outlaws in Midland, Guts returns to aid them in freeing Griffith from the Tower of Rebirth. However, they find out that Griffith is barely alive while mentally and physically tortured and rendered a mute cripple. When Griffith tries to end his life upon realizing what he has reduced to, a solar eclipse occurs, which draws him, Guts, Casca and the members of the Band of the Hawks into another dimension where they encounter the demons known as the God Hand. Told everything he went through has been leading to this moment, Griffith is given a choice to be reborn as one of them and accepts while knowing his transition to the final member of God Hand requires his allies sacrificed to feed the God Hand's gathered demon servants: the Apostles. In this hopeless battle with powerful demons, Guts tries to rescue Griffith, but fails with Griffith reborn as Femto. After he and Casca, who lost her sanity from the nightmarish hell she endured, are spirited back to their world, Guts begins his journey to hunt down the Apostles and the God Hand so he can kill Griffith.


== Music ==
The soundtracks for the film series was composed and arranged by Shiro Sagisu, with the theme song composed and arranged by Susumu Hirasawa. The insert song of all films, "Aria", was sung by Hirasawa, a live performance (from Phonon 2555 Vision) is included on the home video releases of the second film, another live version is on the Nomonos and Imium DVD; the ending theme of the first film, "Utsukushii Mono" (ウツクシキモノ, "Pretty Thing"), was sung by the R&B singer AI (in an uncharacteristic epic ballad style) and composed by Rykeyz and Redd Styiez, the ending theme of the third film, "breakthrough, was performed by CHEMISTRY, written by Kaname Kawabata, Hidenori Tanaka and UTA & arranged by Sagisu, Miho Hazama and CHOKKAKU. A special TV program, narrated by Akio Ōtsuka (the voice actor for the Skull Knight), that summarized the events of the first two movies, used the Hirasawa song Horde of Thistledown (冠毛種子の大群, Kanmō Shushi no Taigun) (from The Secret of The Flowers of Phenomenon) as its ending theme.


== Home media ==
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc I - The Egg of the King (Viz Pictures - Nov 27, 2012)
Video: 2.35:1 [MPEG-4 AVC] (1080p)
Audio: English and Japanese (DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1)
Subtitles: English
Extras: Art Gallery and Trailer (Viz Releases)
Case type: Keep Case
Note: The film suffers from banding issues. (This appears to be a problem with the first two films so far)
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc II - The Battle for Doldrey (Viz Pictures - Aug 06, 2013)
Video: 2.35:1 [MPEG-4 AVC] (1080p)
Audio: English and Japanese (DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1)
Subtitles: English
Extras:
Production Art Gallery
International Trailers for the First Film
Live Concert of Susumu Hirasawa "Aria" (4 min)
Interview (in Japanese) with Aki Toyosaki and Minako Kotobuki (12 min)
Outtakes of the English Dubbing (15 min)
Case type: Keep Case
Note: The film suffers from banding issues. (This appears to a problem with the first two films so far)
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc III - The Advent (Viz Pictures - Apr 15, 2014)
Video: 2.35:1 [MPEG-4 AVC] (1080p)
Audio: English and Japanese (DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1)
Subtitles: English


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (Japanese)
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc I: The Egg of the King at the Internet Movie Database
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc II: The Battle for Doldrey at the Internet Movie Database
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc III: The Advent at the Internet Movie Database
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc I: The Egg of the King (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc II: The Battle for Doldrey (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Berserk: The Golden Age Arc III: The Advent (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia