The following is a list of characters from Michael Crichton's novels, Jurassic Park, and its sequel, The Lost World. Details are also given on the characters' roles in Steven Spielberg's film adaptations, Jurassic Park and The Lost World: Jurassic Park, as well as Jurassic Park III and Jurassic World and other related media. Jurassic Park III and Jurassic World are not adaptations, but contain characters and events based on Crichton's novels.


== Appearing in Jurassic ParkEdit ==

Jurassic Park is a 1990 science fiction novel written by Michael Crichton, adapted into a feature film released in 1993. As the novel opens, billionaire entrepreneur John Hammond founds a high-tech amusement park on the fictional Costa Rican island of Isla Nublar, filled with dinosaurs cloned from DNA harvested from prehistoric insects found in amber. In order to open the park, he must first gain the approval of several experts in different fields. Hammond invites palaeontologists Alan Grant and Ellie Sattler, mathematician Ian Malcolm, and his investor's attorney, Donald Gennaro, to tour the park. Upon arrival, the experts begin to discover errors in the system, such as dinosaurs in the wrong pens and evidence of dinosaurs breeding in the wild. These errors occur in spite of Jurassic Park being run by expert computer engineers and top-notch technical systems. Soon after, due to a tropical storm and industrial sabotage by a disgruntled technician, the park undergoes several technical failures and the dinosaurs escape their pens. A tyrannosaur attacks the group, separating them, and the staff make a desperate attempt to regain control of the situation. As Ian Malcolm had predicted from the start, it becomes quite clear that they had never been in control. Often considered a cautionary tale on biological tinkering in the same spirit as Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, the book uses the mathematical concept of chaos theory and its philosophical implications to explain the inevitable collapse of the park.
The first two film sequels take place on Isla Sorna, a nearby island known as "Site B", where the dinosaurs were engineered and nurtured for a few months, before being moved to Isla Nublar. Jurassic World, the third sequel, sees the story return to Isla Nublar.


=== Dr. Alan GrantEdit ===

Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), Jurassic Park III
Portrayed by: Sam Neill
Dr. Alan Grant is the main protagonist in the first novel, as well as the first and third films. In the novel, Grant is described as a barrel-chested, bearded man with a strong affinity for children, especially ones interested in dinosaurs. Grant, based on paleontologists Philip J. Currie  and Jack Horner, is said to be one of the world's most renowned paleontologists, specializing in hadrosaur and other duck-billed dinosaurs such as Maiasaura. His scientific achievements, including the first description of maiasaurs, are that of Robert R. Makela and Jack Horner. In the book, Grant tells the children that he once had a wife who died years before the story began.
Dr. Grant was first approached before the events of the novel by Donald Gennaro, chief counsel for InGen, to provide information on the requirements for the care of infant dinosaurs, claiming it to be for a museum exhibit. He is invited by John Hammond, the eccentric billionaire and creator of Jurassic Park, to take a tour of the park and endorse it so his investors would be more confident. Finding it hard to turn down a request from a major financial donor, Grant agrees, unaware that Hammond has managed to clone real dinosaurs. When the creatures escape, Grant becomes stranded in the park with Hammond's grandchildren. Throughout a large portion of the book, Dr. Grant and the two children explore the park trying to find their way back to the rest of the group. In the film, much of this time is omitted, with only a few key events occurring on screen.
In the second novel, The Lost World, he is only mentioned. Richard Levine tells Ian Malcolm that he asked Grant about rumors that InGen was cloning dinosaurs; according to Levine, Grant said the rumors were "absurd". He is mentioned a second time when Levine criticizes Grant's theory that a Tyrannosaurus rex could not function in rainy climates.
The film portrays a very different personality than that of the novel. In the films, Dr. Grant has an introverted personality and does not like children. Throughout the course of the first film, however, he warms to the two children accompanying him, Tim and Lex. This was done because Spielberg wanted to "provide a source of dramatic tension that did not exist in the novel". In the film, Dr. Grant specializes in Velociraptors, and believes that birds are closely related to dinosaurs. At the end of the film, his experience on the island changes his view of children (and dinosaurs) and he decides not to endorse Jurassic Park.
He is the central protagonist of Jurassic Park III. In the years since the incident on Isla Nublar, Grant has continued his research on fossils, shrugging off the notion that such endeavors are moot with living breathing dinosaurs on Isla Sorna by claiming that InGen's creatures are just "genetically engineered theme park monsters" and not real dinosaurs. As in the first film, his research is focused on velociraptors and he has proposed new theories regarding Velociraptor intelligence. Grant reluctantly agrees to join an allegedly wealthy couple for an aerial tour of Isla Sorna, Jurassic Park's "Site B", in exchange for funding for his dig site. Due to a plane crash, however, Dr. Grant and the others become stranded on the island. While navigating the island, he realizes that his theories about Velociraptors were correct. He discovers that the raptors have advanced intelligence and communication abilities. He manages to escape the island via a rescue operation headed by Ellie Sattler.
In the Jurassic Park universe, Grant is credited with having written at least two popular books on dinosaurs. In both Jurassic Park and Jurassic Park III, his works are referenced by Tim Murphy and Eric Kirby, respectively.


=== Dr. Ellie SattlerEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), Jurassic Park III
Portrayed by: Laura Dern
Dr. Ellie Sattler is, in the novel, a graduate student studying under Dr. Alan Grant who specializes in paleobotany and is from Montana. She accompanies Dr. Grant on the tour of InGen's dinosaur preserve. Although she is initially thrilled to tour the park, she discovers poisonous plants in public areas and near swimming pools, and is disappointed at how little attention the staff has paid to reproducing prehistoric plant life. While the rest of the group tours the park by Land Cruiser, she stays with Dr. Harding, the park vet, to help discover the cause of a sick Stegosaurus (Triceratops in the film). After the Tyrannosaurus rex attack, she helps Dr. Harding take care of Ian Malcolm’s injuries. During the raptor assault on the visitor's center, Sattler uses herself as bait in an attempt to distract a pack of Velociraptors trying to get into the lodge. Although she survives the events of the novel, she does not play a role in the sequel novel. She is mentioned in passing as having married a Berkeley physicist, and doing guest lectures there on prehistoric pollens.
Ellie has a more prominent role in the first film than in the novel. Due to alterations to the plot in the film, Ellie does many of the things done by Donald Gennaro in the novel. In the film, it is Ellie who ventures out of the bunker with Muldoon to bring the park's power systems back online. Additionally, in the film, Ellie is both a doctor of paleobotany and in a relationship with Dr. Grant. Spielberg did this not only to add tension to the film, but also because he felt that she did not get enough attention in the book.
Sattler has a minor role in Jurassic Park III. According to the film, her relationship with Dr. Grant ended after the first film, but they remain close friends. She is married to Mark, an attorney for the U.S. State Department who specializes in treaty law. They live in Washington, D.C. with their two children and host Alan for dinner. Later, when he is stranded on Isla Sorna, it is Ellie who Grant calls for help. She tells her husband, who sends in the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marines to rescue them.


=== Dr. Ian MalcolmEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), The Lost World (novel and film), Jurassic World (book cameo)
Portrayed by: Jeff Goldblum
Dr. Ian Malcolm is a mathematician at the University of Texas at Austin who specializes in chaos theory. His character is based on both Ivar Ekeland and James Gleick. Malcolm's all-black clothing style reflects that of Heinz-Otto Peitgen, a mathematician who wrote a richly illustrated book on fractals. The character of Ian Malcolm functions as the "ironic commentator inside the story who talks about the action as it takes place".
Throughout Jurassic Park, he makes several predictions based on chaos theory about the consequences and ultimate failure of attempting to control nature, which often turn out to be correct. During his time on the island, Malcolm is seriously injured during the initial tyrannosaur attack. He survives and is brought back to the visitor's center, and spends the remainder of the novel bedridden, usually under the influence of high doses of morphine, continuing to comment on the Park's inherent flaws and impending collapse. Although he is declared dead at the end of the novel, in the sequel, he explains that the declaration was premature. Due to timely intervention by Costa Rican surgeons, he survives the ordeal, but ends up with a permanent leg injury, requiring a cane to walk.
Ian Malcolm is the main protagonist of The Lost World. This time, he is asked to join an expedition to Isla Sorna, Jurassic Park's secondary site, by wealthy adventurer Richard Levine. Malcolm initially declines, but decides to go when word comes back that Levine has gone alone and is trapped on the island. Malcolm takes charge of Levine's remaining expedition and mounts a rescue. By the time frame of The Lost World, Malcolm has become more proactive and vigorous and has enhanced his knowledge about dinosaurs. He is again injured in a dinosaur attack but survives. In the film adaptation, John Hammond hires Malcolm and others to visit the island in order to document the dinosaurs in their natural habitat. Malcolm agrees, but only to rescue his girlfriend, Dr. Sarah Harding, who had already set out for the island. Once there, the team must contend with a rival expedition intent on harvesting dinosaurs for a Jurassic Park-like attraction on the mainland.
Malcolm does not appear in Jurassic Park III, but is mentioned once by Dr. Grant during his communication with Eric during their stay at Isla Sorna about a book he wrote.
In Jurassic World, Malcolm's name briefly appears on the cover of his book God Creates Dinosaurs, which is a reference to a line in the first film that has become iconic with his character. During the initial tour of Jurassic Park, Malcolm states, "God creates dinosaurs, God destroys dinosaurs, God creates man, man destroys God, man creates dinosaurs."


=== John HammondEdit ===

Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Richard Attenborough
John Hammond is one of the primary antagonists of the novel. He is the owner of Jurassic Park and founder of InGen. According to the novel, his full name is John Alfred Hammond, but in a video game based on the film, he is referred to as John Parker Hammond. Although he is not modeled after anyone in particular, Crichton explained in an interview that Hammond is like the "dark side of Walt Disney". He is portrayed as a cold, eccentric CEO interested only in making a profit and succeeding in creating dinosaurs. When explaining to Dr. Wu why he chose to spend his money on an amusement park rather than helping mankind, Hammond said, "That's a terrible idea. A very poor use of new technology...helping mankind (is) a very risky business. Personally, I would never help mankind."
In the novel, Hammond takes little responsibility for the park or its failures and instead blames others for anything that goes wrong. He concludes that the people he selected as the park's senior staff have character flaws that prevent his vision for the park from being realized. During the events of the novel, he remains in the relative safety of the visitor's center and his private bungalow, continuing to believe that he is in control, even as the surrounding situation grows exceedingly dire. When his grandchildren get lost in the park, he maintains his belief that order will soon be restored and that the children are in no real danger. Near the end of the novel, when the staff regains control of the park, he goes outside for a walk. He rationalizes the disaster in the cold manner of a corporate systems' analyst, deciding that everything that has happened was merely a fluke, reflecting that everyone he hired had some personal flaw that prevented them from realizing what he was trying to achieve, and that next time he will do better. While he is out, however, he is startled by the sound of a Tyrannosaurus rex roar, falls down a hill, and breaks his ankle. He is unable to climb up the hill and is subsequently killed by a pack of Procompsognathus.
In a stark contrast to the cold, uncaring persona depicted in the novel, Hammond's film counterpart is a jovial and kind man who takes responsibility for his actions, demonstrating real concern for his grandchildren when they are in danger. He is depicted as a sympathetic grandfather who means well and appears less interested in profit than his novel counterpart, with some greedy negative aspects being transferred to Gennaro. The film's Hammond has a deeper, more emotional understanding of creating attractions for children and families and desires to make this attraction a scientific reality, noting at one point that his first attraction was a motorized flea circus and for the park he wanted to give them something real. However, he is misguided in his steadfast belief that his creations are under control, as he underestimates the power of genetics. He also has little regard for scientific research doctrine, being more interested in the applications of genetic engineering than in the moral implications of such creations. When the security system breaks down, he and his staff work to restore power and rescue the experts and his grandchildren, while themselves remaining in a secure control room. Eventually, however, he and the other survivors ruefully leave the island, Hammond accepting that the park has failed.
In the second film, he is older and appears to be in failing health. His position as CEO has been taken away by his nephew, Peter Ludlow, so he devotes what resources he has left to keeping the dinosaurs of "Site B" isolated from the rest of the world. Ludlow, however, arranges a large expedition to capture as many dinosaurs as possible and rebuild Jurassic Park on the mainland. In an attempt to stop him, Hammond sends a small party, including a reluctant Ian Malcolm, to intercept them. Ultimately, the expedition is halted and Hammond is able to publicly advocate his idea to leave the dinosaurs in peace on the island, regarding what Malcolm previously told him: "Life will find a way.".
Hammond does not appear in the third film, but is mentioned once by Grant during his lecture about Velociraptors to a group of people.
Between July 2004 and March 2008, Attenborough said he would reprise his role for the fourth film, although his character was eventually removed. In the fourth film, Jurassic World, Hammond has been deceased for some time; a memorial statue of him is present in the new theme park known as Jurassic World. In 2014, a viral marketing website for the fictional Masrani Global Corporation was launched to promote Jurassic World. According to the website, Hammond died in 1997.


=== Lex MurphyEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Ariana Richards
Lex Murphy is Tim Murphy's sister and John Hammond's granddaughter.
In the novel, she is described as a seven- or eight-year-old girl, relatively outgoing, blonde and "a sporty young girl who loves baseball". She wears a baseball glove slung over her shoulder and a baseball cap just about everywhere. Lex is shown having the traits of a stereotypical child that whines and complains. Her selfish and childish behavior often annoys the people around her and puts her and the group in danger. Throughout the novel, she shows characteristics of her grandfather, John Hammond, such as being unkind, careless, and unappreciative of the events occurring around her.
In Spielberg's 1993 film, Lex is the elder of the two siblings at the age of 12-14 and has a different personality, similar to that of her brother's from the novel. In the film, Lex has advanced computer skills, being a "computer geek", according to Tim, that help the survivors escape a pack of Velociraptors. While initially frightened by many of the dinosaurs, Lex eventually gains maturity and courage and is instrumental in rebooting the park's systems. Much like Dr. Ellie Sattler, Lex's personality is improved to add strong female roles to the film.
She makes a cameo in the second film when Ian Malcolm comes to visit John Hammond. During this appearance, she is visibly older, likely in her late teen years. Malcolm comments on Timmy and Lex, saying "look at how big you've gotten".


=== Tim MurphyEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Joseph Mazzello
Tim Murphy is Lex Murphy's brother and John Hammond's grandson. He is described as a bespectacled boy of about eleven who has an interest in dinosaurs and computers. His quick thinking and encyclopedic knowledge of dinosaurs aid the group several times, and Tim is instrumental in discovering that dinosaurs have escaped the island, as well as regaining the means to warn the mainland in time. Later, Tim's ingenuity and technical knowledge allow him to navigate the Park's computer systems and reactivate the physical security systems before the Velociraptors gain access to the visitor's lodge. His expertise regarding dinosaurs rivals Dr. Grant's, and is clearly superior to that of Dr. Henry Wu, the scientist who created the dinosaurs. Already familiar with his work before they meet, Tim almost immediately strikes up a friendship with Dr. Grant. According to Grant, "it's hard not to like someone so interested in dinosaurs". Tim's father does not share his interest in paleontology, so the dinosaur-loving Grant forms an instant bond with Tim during their time in the park.
In Spielberg's film, Tim and Lex's ages were swapped so that Lex was the older sibling and some aspects of his personality and story responsibilities were given to Lex. For example, he is still the child interested in dinosaurs, however all of his computer knowledge was given to Lex. This was done so that Spielberg could work specifically with actor Joseph Mazzello, who was younger than Ariana Richards and to make Lex into a stronger character.
Tim makes a cameo in the second film, along with his sister, Lex, during Ian Malcolm's visit to John Hammond. He is visibly older, likely 12–14 years of age.


=== Dr. Marty GutierrezEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel), The Lost World (novel)
Dr. Marty Gutierrez is an American biologist who lives in Costa Rica. He plays an expository role in both novels. In the first novel, he identifies an unknown lizard that attacks a little girl as Basiliscus amoratus. He is initially unhappy with this identification because the lizard was more venomous than expected and had three toes. He searches the beach where she was attacked and finds the corpse of a similar lizard in the mouth of a howler monkey, which he promptly sends to the laboratory for tropical diseases at Columbia University in New York for further study.
In the second novel, he finds and shows Richard Levine a dried up corpse of an unknown creature, oddly similar to the ones found prior to the Jurassic Park incident. He informs Levine that no one knows where these creatures are coming from.
Gutierrez holds the distinction of being the only character to appear in both novels but none of the films.


=== Dr. Lewis DodgsonEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), The Lost World (novel)
Portrayed by: Cameron Thor
Dr. Lewis Dodgson is the antagonist of the Jurassic Park novels.
In the Jurassic Park universe, Dodgson is an ambitious scientist who is unafraid to make aggressive moves generally considered unethical to get what he wants, saying that he "won't be held back by regulations made for lesser souls". Dodgson works for the Biosyn Corporation, a company that rivals Hammond's and has a far spottier scientific reputation. Dodgson is described in the novels as more of a salesman than a scientist, and someone who specializes in both reverse-engineering and the adulteration/theft of the work of others. He hopes to get his hands on Hammond's technology in order to create dinosaurs of his own. He and his company seek to clone dinosaurs not as an attraction, but as potential test subjects for laboratory applications. He is portrayed as cold, ruthless, and impatient. During the first novel, Dodgson hires Dennis Nedry to steal dinosaur embryos for Biosyn, but the plot fails when Nedry is killed by a Dilophosaurus on the way out.
In the sequel novel, Dodgson is much more ambitious and takes a team to Isla Sorna in an attempt to collect fertilized dinosaur eggs. He is more antagonistic and most evil in this novel, as he attempts to murder Sarah Harding. Dodgson and his team, ignorant to the dangers of these animals, are quickly killed.
Dodgson makes a short appearance in the first film and is completely written out of the second film. For the second film, his character's profit-driven actions and naivete regarding the dinosaurs are transferred to Peter Ludlow.


=== John Arnold/Ray ArnoldEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Samuel L. Jackson
John Arnold is Jurassic Park's chief engineer, running the main control center from the visitor center. He is described as a thin, chain-smoking man, and a chronic worrier. A gifted systems engineer, Arnold had designed weapons for the U.S. military and later worked at several theme parks and zoos before joining the Jurassic Park team. He was a grudgingly optimistic man, who maintained total faith in the computer systems and continued to believe that despite the setbacks, things would work out in the end. When Dennis Nedry locks them out of the system, Arnold, after much persuasion by Donald Gennaro, shuts off all power to the park and resets the computer-control systems. After turning the power back on, he believes the problem has been solved, when it has actually been made worse. By shutting down the main power grid, he turned off several systems that were unaffected by Nedry's lockout, including the Velociraptor paddock. Arnold realizes his mistake many hours later, and volunteers to go outside and restore power to the main generator, but before he is able to, he is killed by an escaped Velociraptor.
In Spielberg's 1993 film, Arnold is referred to as "Ray", although his first name in the novel is John. This was done to distinguish him from John Hammond. Although in a deleted scene from the second film, he is mentioned as "John Arnold." In the film, Arnold has a smaller role than in the novel but retains the same personality and outlook. Arnold's death is not shown on camera, but is confirmed when his severed arm falls onto Ellie Sattler's shoulder in the power shed. In the second film's deleted scene, Arnold's family is said to have received a $23 million settlement from InGen in a lawsuit regarding his death.


=== Donald GennaroEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Martin Ferrero
Donald Gennaro is the attorney sent on behalf of Jurassic Park's investors to investigate the safety of the park after several reports of missing or dead workers. He is described in the novel as a short, muscular man and represents an "everyman" personality among the characters. Although he is initially worried only about disappointing his supervisors, he soon drops this when his life is threatened, focusing on survival instead. When problems begin to occur, he consistently handles them appropriately, accompanying Robert Muldoon on a mission to subdue the Tyrannosaurus rex and successfully restoring power, despite being ambushed by a Velociraptor. Grant claims that his negative attitude comes from trying to avoid responsibility for his role in creating the park. Near the end of the novel, Gennaro realizes that he is partially responsible for everything occurring when Grant says, "You sold investors on an undertaking you didn't fully understand... You did not check on the activities of a man whom you knew from experience to be a liar, and you permitted that man to screw around with the most dangerous technology in human history." Gennaro then helps Grant in his attempt to wipe out the remaining Velociraptors and their eggs with nerve gas. Although he survives the events on the island, he dies of dysentery sometime after.
For the film, Spielberg condensed the characters Ed Regis and Donald Gennaro and some negative aspects of Hammond into one character. The result is a character who is cowardly and greedy. When the other scientists criticize Hammond's park for various reasons, Gennaro is the only one left who supports the concept. When the electric fence around the Tyrannosaurus paddock fails, Gennaro is overcome by fear and abandons Tim and Lex. Hiding in a toilet stall, he is subsequently eaten by the Tyrannosaurus moments after it breaks out of its pen. In a deleted scene from The Lost World: Jurassic Park, a statement reveals that Gennaro's family received $36.5 million from InGen as a settlement for his death.


=== Dr. HardingEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), Jurassic Park: The Game
Portrayed by: Gerald R. Molen (in the film), Jon Curry (in The Game)
Dr. Harding is Jurassic Park's chief veterinarian. In the novel, he had been the chief of veterinary medicine for the San Diego Zoo, and was the world's leading expert on avian care. He accepted the job at Jurassic Park because he wanted to become famous for being the first person to write a textbook on the care of dinosaurs. When the group first encounters him, he is looking after a sick Stegosaurus. With the help of Ellie Sattler, he finds the source of the animal's sickness and is able to treat it. Being the only doctor on the island, he is the one who treats Malcolm after he is attacked by the Tyrannosaurus. He is attacked by a Velociraptor during the assault on the visitor's center, but ultimately survives his time on the island. It is implied in the second novel that Sarah Harding is his daughter; she mentions that her father was a veterinarian and bird specialist at the San Diego Zoo.
He makes a brief appearance in the first film with a sick Triceratops before leaving on the boat for the mainland. He also appears as one of the main characters in Jurassic Park: The Game, a 2011 film-inspired video game in which he has a daughter named Jess. In the game, he is portrayed as being significantly younger than his appearance in the movie. While his first name is never mentioned in the novel or the film, he is referred to in Jurassic Park: The Game as Dr. Gerry Harding. In the game, Sarah Harding is mentioned as his daughter.


=== Robert MuldoonEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Bob Peck
Robert Muldoon is Jurassic Park's game warden. Described in the novel as a burly man about fifty years of age with deep blue eyes and a steel gray mustache, Muldoon is a former wildlife hunter who worked with Hammond on one of his previous parks in Kenya. He has experience working with dangerous predators and thus unlike most other characters, his attitude to the dinosaurs is realistic and unromantic. He believes that the Velociraptors should be destroyed, describing them as smart and potentially dangerous. He also recommended that the park be equipped with more military grade weapons for use in emergencies, but was overruled. He reminds Hammond of this when it dawns on them that they have no way of stopping the escaped T. rex. Muldoon spends most of the novel riding around the park, drinking whiskey and attempting to restore order. He is later attacked by a pack of Velociraptors, but survives by wedging himself into a pipe. He manages to kill a few of them, and eventually escapes the island with the other survivors.
In the film, his character is much more serious. In the introduction, when a worker is attacked by a Velociraptor that the park staff are transporting, he gives the order to kill it. He notes that the raptors have tested the perimeter fence in different places, probing for an opening. He remains in the control room with Hammond and Arnold, commenting on the many safety and security failures of the park. After the power failure, he drives Sattler to the Tyrannosaurus escape site where they rescue Dr. Malcolm. During an attempt to restore power, Muldoon uses his fedora to set a trap for a Velociraptor to distract it from Ellie, which instead outsmarts and ambushes him.
In a deleted scene from the second movie, Muldoon's family is said to have received $12.6 million in his death settlement.


=== Dennis NedryEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Wayne Knight
Dennis Nedry is one of the main human antagonists in the novel and film. In the novel, he is described as an obese and messy computer scientist. Nedry works for Hammond as the system's programmer and is in charge of networking Jurassic Park's computers. Although he was not given any details about InGen's operation, Nedry was expected to fix numerous bugs and issues without understanding the ultimate goal. After InGen blackmails him to make changes to the system without further payment, he makes a deal with Dodgson of Biosyn to steal several dinosaur embryos for $1.5 million, and is provided an embryo transfer device disguised as a shaving cream container. In order to steal the embryos, he shuts down the park's security systems, including several electric fences surrounding select dinosaur paddocks. He intended to steal embryos from a secure lab, drive them through the park to a waiting agent at the dock, and return to his post before being noticed. Although it was only meant to be temporary, he crashes his Jeep and is subsequently blinded and killed by a Dilophosaurus due to an unexpected storm causing him to miss crucial road signs. In the novel, his body is later found by Muldoon and Gennaro. Although Nedry's pride in his knowledge of complex computer systems made him feel more important than the other workers, Lex (film)/Tim (novel) is later able to easily navigate the system in order to restore power to the visitor's center.
In the second film Nedry's death is not mentioned, either in the general release nor in a deleted scene in which Ludlow mentions the names of deceased victims to InGen's board of directors.
Nedry's role in the film is generally the same as that of the novel, however, due to the deaths of both Muldoon and Gennaro, his body is never found, instead, his jeep is seen shaking, with both the Dilophosaurus and he inside (in the film it is a juvenile), screaming. The shaving cream container is seen rolling down a hill, and buried by mud.


=== Henry WuEdit ===

Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel and film), Jurassic Park: Redemption (Comic Book), Jurassic World
Portrayed by: B.D. Wong
Henry Wu is a character in the first novel and film, and later returns in the fourth film, Jurassic World. Dr. Wu is the chief geneticist in Jurassic Park and head of the team that created the dinosaurs. He is a former child prodigy, gaining early attention from his undergraduate thesis at MIT, and was personally recruited by Hammond after finishing his doctorate. Although he is the instrumental figure behind the procedures used to bring the dinosaurs to life, he demonstrates little concern for the animals, to the extent that he is unable to even remember exactly what species he has created. He proposes genetically altering the dinosaurs to make them more manageable, citing that many of their early assumptions about the behavior and biology of the animals had been wrong, but could not get Hammond's approval. This is used as motive for his actions in Jurassic World. When he is later presented with the fact that the dinosaurs have been breeding, essentially proving that he had failed to engineer them properly, he mistook it as a "tremendous validation of his work." In the novel, he is killed during the assault on the visitor's center when a Velociraptor jumps down onto him from the center's roof.
Wu has a greatly reduced role in the first film, merely giving a tour of the research facility. He leaves the island on the last boat to the mainland before the tropical storm and the power failure.
He is indirectly mentioned in the second novel when Malcolm discovers old InGen documents addressed to Dr. Henry Wu scattered throughout the abandoned manufacturing plant on Isla Sorna.
Jurassic World director Colin Trevorrow confirmed in 2014 that Wong would return to portray Wu in the film.
In 2014, a viral marketing website for the fictional Masrani Global Corporation was launched to promote Jurassic World. According to the website, Dr. Wu continued his work on DNA and even created a new plant called the Wu flower through the DNA of different plants. Masrani Global Corporation's CEO Simon Masrani took over InGen and promoted Wu. The website revealed in November 2014, that a new InGen facility named "Martel" opened in Siberia. The goal of Martel was to extract Pleistocene-dated organic materials from glacial ice. Wu showed excitement for the project, believing it will expand InGen's genome library.
In Jurassic World, Dr. Wu is first seen with Claire Dearing, trying to attract investors with the genetically modified Indominus rex. He refuses to tell anyone the DNA combination until the owner Masrani confronts him about the Indominus‍ '​ escape. Masrani lectures him, but Wu retaliates, stating that the owner wanted "more teeth" to attract visitors. When Vic Hoskins takes command of the park, Wu is evacuated to the Costa Rican mainland along with the rest of the InGen team. He takes with him several dinosaur embryos at Hoskins' request, thus protecting his research.


=== Ed RegisEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (novel)
Ed Regis is a publicist for InGen and the head of public relations for Jurassic Park. Regis is often given odd jobs by Hammond that are beyond his area of expertise, such as escorting a wounded worker to a Costa Rican hospital and acting as a babysitter for Lex and Tim during their visit to the park. Despite being overconfident about the park and almost negligent about the accidents that have been occurring, fear overtakes him quickly as things begin to go wrong, having personally seen the brutality of dinosaur attacks. When the Tyrannosaurus rex breaks free of its pen, he abandons the tour vehicle, leaving Tim and Lex behind. After hiding between some boulders, he tries to make his way back up to the cars, but is killed by a juvenile Tyrannosaurus rex. His severed leg is later discovered by Gennaro and Muldoon as they investigate the attack and is brought back to the Visitor's Center.
Ed Regis's character is written out of the film, although certain aspects of his character such as his nervousness and cowardice are given to the film's version of Donald Gennaro. Gennaro's death sequence during the T. rex attack in the film is also reminiscent of Regis's death.


=== Mr. DNAEdit ===
Appears in: Jurassic Park (film), Jurassic World
Voiced by: Greg Burson (in Jurassic Park), Colin Trevorrow (in Jurassic World)
Mr. DNA is a cartoon character that resembles an anthropomorphic DNA helix with a face and arms who was exclusive to the film franchise. He represents the mascot for Jurassic Park and, later, Jurassic World.
In Jurassic Park, Mr. DNA was created by InGen to help visitors understand the processes involved in the creation of the dinosaurs at Jurassic Park. A film starring him and InGen's founder John Hammond would be played in a theater located in the park's Visitor Center before a tour. He became iconic with the franchise, even though he was given a small role in the original film.
In the Super Nintendo version of the Jurassic Park video game, Mr. DNA appears onscreen when the player does not move for a fixed amount of time. He then offers dinosaur trivia to the player.
In the 2011 video game, Jurassic Park: The Game, Mr. DNA is visible on the maintenance board of Jurassic Park's Geothermal Power Plant and on a board telling how tall a person must be to ride the upcoming Bone Shaker roller coaster.
In Jurassic World, Mr. DNA was brought back by the Masrani Global Corporation for their new dinosaur park, Jurassic World. He remained the same as his original counterpart, but two variations of him existed: one with only blue and white existed representing the colors of Jurassic World's logo and the other being red and white. Visitors could encounter him in the Innovation Center where he explains the basics of genetics and how the dinosaurs were recreated. His appearance was received ecstatically by fans of the original film.
In the 2015 video game, Lego Jurassic World, Mr. DNA is a playable character and appears throughout the game to give hints to the player(s) on how to progress through the levels. As with the original Jurassic Park video game, he also offers dinosaur trivia to the player(s). He could be considered sentient, as he is aware of InGen's political dealings, and will inform the player of them. Yet, he will always offer a positive spin on it, portraying a true company mascot.


== Appearing in The Lost WorldEdit ==
These characters first appear either in the novel, The Lost World, or in the film adaptation, The Lost World: Jurassic Park.


=== Dr. Sarah HardingEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Julianne Moore
Dr. Sarah Harding, in the novel, is an animal behaviorist who specializes in African predators. She is intelligent and rugged, and employs common sense and practicality in dangerous situations, putting the safety of her colleagues first. Her calm, skilled personality permits her to quickly take command of the group and devise ways for them to survive and escape the island. She and Ian Malcolm were in a relationship for a period, where, at one point, she claimed she was in love with him. The relationship didn't work out, although they still remained close friends. She is idolized by Kelly who sees her as tough and smart. In the novel, she mentions that her father was a veterinarian and bird specialist at the San Diego Zoo, implying that Dr. Harding is her father.
In the movie, Dr. Harding's character is merged with that of Richard Levine's. She is still intelligent, but impulsive and too eager to interact with the animals, often placing herself and others in danger. Her character in the film is a behavioral paleontologist, rather than an animal behaviorist, who specializes in dinosaur parenting behavior. Her relationship with Ian Malcolm is far more in-depth, as they remain together for the duration of the film.


=== Kelly CurtisEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Vanessa Lee Chester
Kelly Curtis is a close friend of Arby and, in the film only, Malcolm's daughter. Kelly is fascinated by science and idolizes Dr. Sarah Harding. When she learned that Sarah would be on the trip, she decided to sneak aboard. In both the film and novel, Kelly manages to overpower a Velociraptor by hitting one onto a broken pipe and shooting one with a Lindstradt air rifle, respectively. The film adaptation merged her character with Arby's. In the film, she is said to have skill in gymnastics, which she uses to rescue her father from a Velociraptor.


=== Nick Van OwenEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Vince Vaughn
Nick Van Owen is a video documentarian and member of Malcolm's expedition to Isla Sorna. He is an experienced documentary filmmaker, having covered wars in Rwanda and Bosnia. He has also worked with Greenpeace, the experience of which later spurs him to act in defense of the dinosaurs. He is the only member of the team to be warned about InGen's expedition, and sneaks into their camp to release captured animals and disrupt their harvesting operation. He also rescues the infant T. rex from Tembo, leading to a confrontation with its parents which strands both teams on the island. As the teams merge and form an escape plan, Nick easily gains the tacit respect of the rugged InGen men, as in one scene he is shown to effortlessly motivate the men while Peter Ludlow fails. His activist nature conflicts with the Great White Hunter style of Tembo, and he later covertly switches the latter's ammunition to ensure the T. rex adults won't be killed. When the group reaches the InGen compound, it is Nick who uses the radio to call for rescue. He is last seen on the first evacuation helicopter, reflecting.
David Koepp, the writer of the film, chose the surname Van Owen as a reference to one of his favorite songs, "Roland the Headless Thompson Gunner", by Warren Zevon.


=== Richard LevineEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
In the Jurassic Park universe, Richard Levine is one of the world's most brilliant and richest paleontologists. Dr. Marty Guitierrez seems to be his only real friend, although he eventually forms a delicate relationship with Ian Malcolm. Levine's egotism and spontaneous personality prove to be a source of constant irritation to the rest of his colleagues, mainly Malcolm. The children, Arby Benton and Kelly Curtis, however, look up to him, causing him to develop a paternal attitude towards them.
Levine originally intended to travel to Isla Sorna as part of Malcolm's team, but, instead, heads out on his own before the Costa Rican government has a chance to destroy the island. When the rest of his team arrives, they find themselves constantly running after him when he decides to continue his research regardless of what else is happening around him. Although he is bitten twice by compies, he ultimately escapes the island without major harm.


=== Jack "Doc" ThorneEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
Jack "Doc" Thorne is a former university professor and materials engineer who specializes in building field equipment, vehicles, and weaponry for scientists all over the world. He is an eclectic mix of character traits, relying on both practical expertise and Eastern philosophy, claiming that one needs to know philosophy and history to succeed in engineering. His company, Mobile Field Systems, is hired by Richard Levine to outfit his expedition to study the dinosaur population on Isla Sorna. Thorne's contribution to Levine's mission includes a large research trailer, nicknamed "The Challenger", an electric SUV, a motor bike, a pair of Lindstradt air rifles, and a modified satellite phone. When Levine goes missing on the island, Thorne ends up heading to Isla Sorna with Ian Malcolm and Eddie Carr to retrieve him. On the island, Thorne ends up saving his friends multiple times, and ends up surviving his time on the island.
Thorne is not a character in the film, although parts of his character are integrated into its portrayal of Eddie Carr and Roland Tembo.


=== Ajay SidhuEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Harvey Jason
Ajay Sidhu is Roland Tembo's best friend and hunting partner from India. He accompanies Tembo in his attempt to capture the T. rex. Fleeing from the T. rex, he warns Tembo's men to stay out of the long grass, but they disobey this warning, after which he follows them in. The entire group is eventually killed by Velociraptors. Ajay's death is not shown on screen, but Tembo later confirms it, by stating that Ajay "didn't make it".


=== Eddie CarrEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel and film)
Portrayed by: Richard Schiff
Eddie Carr is the group's field equipment expert. He is added to the team sent to the island because the vehicles he designed had not been field-tested. Eddie is frightened by Isla Sorna and wants nothing more than to retrieve Richard Levine and get off the island as soon as possible. He has a slightly antagonistic relationship with Ian Malcolm, who does not like that Carr's world is so heavily influenced by unreliable electronics. He is eventually killed by a pack of raptors while fighting them off with an iron pipe. In the film, while he is attempting to rescue Ian, Sarah, and Nick, he is killed by the two adult T. rex before they push the trailers off the cliff. His relationship with Malcolm in the film is apparently positive, for Malcolm leaves him to take care of his daughter, and when he is eaten, Malcolm demands that he be given respect for trying to rescue them.
In the second novel, he is described as a compact, strong, 25-year-old who prefers the city. In the film, he has black hair, is balding, and is at least ten years older than the description in the novel, taking on some characteristics of Doc Thorne.


=== R. B. "Arby" BentonEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
R. B. "Arby" Benton is a young African American who is friends with Kelly. He tends to be quiet and shy, but is very intelligent and good with computers. When Kelly expressed interest in stowing away in the Challenger with him, it was he who came up with a plan on how to do so.


=== Howard KingEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
Howard King is an assistant to Lewis Dodgson. Once a successful biologist employed by Biosyn, he lost credibility when his research on blood-coagulation factors failed. Dodgson hired King as his assistant in the reverse engineering department. He is divorced and has one child, who he sees only on weekends. In the novel, he accompanies Dodgson to the island, but they separate when they fail to retrieve eggs from a Tyrannosaurus nest. King eventually begins to disagree with Dodgson's dark desires, relieved when he sees his beaten body. Eventually, he is killed by Velociraptors while trying to escape from a field. His death may have inspired the raptor attack on the InGen team in the movie and is worked into the third movie via Udesky.


=== George BaseltonEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
George Baselton is Stanford University's Regis Professor of Biology and assistant to Lewis Dodgson. As well known authority and pundit, he is retained by Biosyn and Dodgson to spin any bad press that may arise. When he and Dodgson are trying to steal tyrannosaur eggs, the sonic device Dodgson is using to keep the parent Tyrannosaurs at bay becomes unplugged. Both men stand absolutely still, falsely believing the dinosaurs' vision is based on movement. The Tyrannosaurs subsequently kill him.


=== DiegoEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
Diego is Levine's guide on Isla Sorna. He is a young, enthusiastic Costa Rican who went to the island several times as a boy and knows the land better than anyone else. He does not believe there are dinosaurs there and, even when Levine warns him to be quiet, he simply says that they have nothing to fear. He seems to annoy Levine many times, not only through his insistence that only birds live on the island, but also through disobeying his orders to refrain from using items like cigarettes while on Isla Sorna. Diego is killed when he is ambushed by a Carnotaurus while he and Levine watch a Mussaurus in total awe. Carter seems to have inherited his attitude in the second film. Enrique, from the third movie, also resembles Diego.


=== Peter LudlowEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film), Jurassic Park: Redemption (Comic Book)
Portrayed by: Arliss Howard
Peter Ludlow is the newly elected CEO of InGen. He is John Hammond's nephew, and the main antagonist of the second film. He attained the position during an impromptu meeting with InGen's board of directors after an accident involving a pack of compies prompts them to unanimously oust Hammond with Ludlow as his replacement. His character, based on Lewis Dodgson, is described as ruthless, selfish, greedy, and condescending toward those who worked for him or those he disliked. As a result, he was not very well respected by the members of his team who chose to follow Roland Tembo or Nick van Owen instead of him. In an attempt to revitalize Hammond's original attraction, Ludlow assembled an InGen team to recover Isla Sorna's dinosaurs for display in San Diego. In the end, Ludlow only managed to bring back the male T. rex and its infant, with disastrous results and his own demise, as the adult T. rex began to wreak havoc on San Diego.
In addition to his character, Ludlow's death also mirrors that of Lewis Dodgson. While trying to recapture the infant in the hold of an InGen cargo ship, he was confronted and captured by the adult and then fed to the infant.
In the non-canonical comic series, Ludlow survived the baby T. rex attack but was horribly scarred, he sat on a wheelchair due to his legs being useless and his face was covered with numerous scars. He was killed again, this time by the Velociraptors greatly due to Tim Murphy's actions.


=== Roland TemboEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Pete Postlethwaite
Roland Tembo is a famous animal hunter hired by InGen for the expedition. Although he was hired by InGen, his primary motivation for going to Isla Sorna with his hunting partner, Ajay Sidhu was the possibility of hunting the ultimate trophy, a male Tyrannosaurus. Tembo is not cruel or bloodthirsty, despite his profession, and he holds a personal moral code towards others, such as preventing a possibility that his men would fall victim to predators if they camp on game trails, helping Malcolm and his team up the cliff after their trailers were knocked off by the tyrannosaurs, asking his men never to tell Kelly about the gruesome death of Dieter, and allowing the group to take a break after seeing Sarah and several of his men feeling tired during the journey. Although he gets his prize in the end, he loses the rest of his team to the raptors, including Ajay, who is characterized as Tembo's best friend. When Ludlow offers him a job at the new Jurassic Park in San Diego, he declines by saying "I've spent enough time in the company of death". Without hesitation, Tembo leaves the island by helicopter.
As with Van Owen, Koepp chose the name Roland as a reference to one of his favorite songs, "Roland the Headless Thompson Gunner", by Warren Zevon.


=== Dieter StarkEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Peter Stormare
Dieter Stark was appointed by InGen to be Tembo's second-in-command. Tembo however does not respect him as much as he does his trusted friend Ajay Sidhu. This might be due to Stark being a bloodthirsty and cruel hunter, something which Tembo isn't. After getting lost whilst trying to find a spot to urinate, he is attacked and killed by a group of compies, this is confirmed after Tembo and Ajay find him in the night. As they return to the camp, Tembo is asked by Dr. Malcolm if he had found Stark, and he responds, "Just the parts they didn't like", meaning that he has found Stark's remains left by the compies.
His death mirrors that of John Hammond from the original novel. Although his surname is not verbally mentioned in the film itself, it is listed in the credits. He is portrayed in the film as Swedish.


=== Dr. Robert BurkeEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Thomas F. Duffy
Dr. Robert Burke is InGen's resident paleontologist. Although he was considered by InGen to be one of their top scientists, he provides several pieces of incorrect information, some of which results in the death of Dieter Stark.
During a conversation with Ian Malcolm, Sarah Harding states, "Robert Burke said that the T. rex was a rogue that would abandon its young at the earliest opportunity. I know I can prove otherwise." Burke's theory was disproved later in the film when adult Tyrannosaurs attacked the trailer their infant was being held in.
Burke is killed by a Tyrannosaurus while hiding under a waterfall when he is startled by a snake slithering down into his shirt, much to Sarah, Nick, and Kelly's shock. Ironically, the snake in question was not venomous.


=== CarterEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (film)
Portrayed by: Thomas Rosales, Jr.
Carter is Dieter Stark's friend and a member of the InGen team. He seems absent-minded at times (thanks to his headphones) as evident when Dieter cries for help as he is attacked by compies. Carter is killed when the female T. rex steps on him while fleeing with the rest of the InGen team.


=== Ed JamesEdit ===
Appears in: The Lost World (novel)
Ed James is a private investigator hired by Dodgson shortly after the events in the first novel to get information from the survivors of the Isla Nublar incident. After following Richard Levine around for a while, he learns the location of Isla Sorna, which he then reports to Dodgson. He does not accompany either team to Isla Sorna.


== Appearing in Jurassic Park IIIEdit ==
These characters only appear in the third film, as there was no third novel.


=== Paul KirbyEdit ===
Portrayed by: William H. Macy
Paul Kirby, the owner of a hardware store, posed as a wealthy businessman and head of "Kirby Enterprises" to lure Alan Grant onto Isla Sorna to help the Kirbys search for their missing son. When the group is attacked by the Spinosaurus on the river, Paul uses himself as bait so the others could escape. This allowed Grant an opportunity to divert the Spinosaurus using a flare gun. Paul survives the incident and is rescued from the island with the others. It is implied that Paul and his former-wife, Amanda, reconcile after the events of the film.


=== Amanda KirbyEdit ===
Portrayed by: Téa Leoni
Amanda Kirby is Paul's former wife who accompanies the search party to "Site B" to help look for their missing son, Eric, and her companion, Ben. Through most of the film, Amanda ignores Dr. Grant's warning that loud shouting attracts carnivores. Shortly after being stranded on Isla Sorna, the hired mercenaries are killed by predators. Grant later locates Amanda and Paul's son, Eric, and Amanda eventually reconciles with Paul. She survives the plane crash, the Velociraptor ambush, the Pteranodon attack, and the Spinosaurus attack at the river. When the group is confronted by the raptor pack, Amanda, the lone female in the group, is ordered by Dr. Grant to return the stolen eggs to the Velociraptors. She is rescued from the island, along with Paul, Eric, Grant, and Grant's assistant, Billy. It is implied that Amanda and Paul reconcile with one another at the end of the movie and are returning to Oklahoma as a reunited family.


=== Billy BrennanEdit ===
Portrayed by: Alessandro Nivola
Billy Brennan is a young and overenthusiastic graduate student at Grant's dig site. He accompanies Grant to Isla Sorna where they are stranded with the Kirby's. He later collects Velociraptor eggs, intending to sell them for money to help fund Grant's dig site. Velociraptors stalk the group to get their eggs back. Grant is angry that Billy took the eggs. Billy redeems himself by saving Eric Kirby from Pteranodons. He survives but becomes separated from the others and is presumed dead. He is rescued by the Navy and Marines, that Ellie Sattler sent. He and Grant are reunited on the helicopter.


=== Eric KirbyEdit ===
Portrayed by: Trevor Morgan
Eric Kirby is the 12-year-old son of Paul and Amanda who ends up stranded on "Site B" for eight weeks, and must fend for himself. He found a way to collect T. rex urine and to collect a raptor claw. Dr. Grant said he had a fossil one, from the first film, but Eric's reply was that this was a new one. Grant, after being saved from Velociraptors, reunites him with his parents. After escaping from a Spinosaurus, a flock of Pteranodon and Velociraptors, he finally gets to leave the island with his parents, Grant, and Grant's assistant, Billy Brennan.
A separate series of books entitled "Jurassic Park Adventures" documented Eric's time on Isla Sorna (as well as other related stories) before Grant and the others arrive. The book series was written by Scott Ciencin.


=== UdeskyEdit ===
Portrayed by: Michael Jeter
Udesky is a meek but sardonic mercenary "booking agent" who travels with his two associates to the island when the man who was supposed to go falls ill. He has brown hair, but is balding and has a short mustache. Unlike the two other mercenaries, he survives the Spinosaurus 's attack on the plane. However, after Kirby's scam is revealed, he afterward admits that he actually works for a helping center. After being chased by raptors in an abandoned InGen compound, the raptors start a stampede, he eventually gets separated from the others, who climb a tree. The raptors pin him down but allow him to go near the tree in an attempt to draw the others down. Their plan fails, and one Velociraptor kills Udesky by snapping his neck. His death was based on Howard King's death in The Lost World novel. His death was later inspired for Oscar Morales death in Jurassic Park: The Game.


=== CooperEdit ===
Portrayed by: John Diehl
Cooper is described as a tough and quiet mercenary who is killed by a Spinosaurus on the "Site B" runway. He was abandoned by his fellow mercenaries while searching for Eric. He was eaten by the Spinosaurus while trying to get the plane to stop in order for him to get on. His death is what caused the plane to crash through the forest. When everyone else gets on the plane without Cooper, Udesky states: "Cooper's a professional; he can handle himself".


=== NashEdit ===
Portrayed by: Bruce A. Young
Nash was Kirby's mercenary pilot who abandons Cooper and is subsequently eaten by a Spinosaurus, that dragged him out of the plane wreckage by the legs and then released him. As he tried to crawl through the jungle brush to escape, the Spinosaurus pinned him to the ground with its foot, and devoured him. He was carrying a satellite phone given to him by Paul Kirby at the time he was eaten. When the others later hear the phone ringing, audible from within the dinosaur's abdomen, they know that the Spinosaurus is nearby. The phone was later recovered in a pile of Spinosaurus dung.


=== MarkEdit ===
Portrayed by: Taylor Nichols
Mark is Ellie's husband. He works for the U.S. State Department. Mark is shown to have had a very loving and caring personality, as shown by him changing the baby's diaper while Ellie is talking to Grant.
When Dr. Grant calls Charlie to send help, he sends the phone to his mother, Ellie, who sends the phone to her husband, Mark. Mark was able to use his position in the State Department to contact the military, who send marines to Isla Sorna to rescue the group.


=== Ben HildebrandEdit ===
Portrayed by: Mark Harelik
Ben Hildebrand is Amanda's boyfriend. He takes Eric para-sailing near Isla Sorna. When the boat crew is killed, Ben saved himself and Eric by disconnecting the para-sail from the vessel and glide onto the island. However, they crash-landed in a tree. Although his cause of death is left unexplained, his decomposing corpse is found by Grant and the others still tangled in his parachute.
A possible explanation is that while Eric was able to escape the para-sail, carnivorous dinosaurs attacked a stranded Ben, leaving what Grant's team found eight weeks later.


=== Enrique CardosoEdit ===
Portrayed by: Julio Oscar Mechoso
Enrique Cardoso is the operator of the illegal para-sailing service called "Dino-Soar" which brings visitors to sightsee along the coast of Isla Sorna. He is hired by Ben Hildebrand and Eric Kirby to take them to the island; however, Enrique and his boat driver are killed when they enter a fog bank, causing the vessel to crash and the tourists to become stranded on "Site B".
It is likely that one or two of the Pteranodons from the aviary killed them as what appears to be their skulls is left near the nest. It is not explained, however, just how the Pteranodons escaped from the aviary prior to the arrival of the rescue party, who are shown to unlock it long after the boat crash starts the story.


=== CharlieEdit ===
Portrayed by: Blake Michael Bryan
Charlie is the young son of Ellie and Mark, who calls Grant "The Dinosaur Man". Grant phones Ellie when being attacked by the Spinosaurus, but it is Charlie who answers the phone. Grant tells Charlie to take the phone to Ellie, but he is soon distracted by an episode of Barney the Dinosaur.


== Appearing in Jurassic WorldEdit ==
These characters only appear in the fourth film.


=== Owen GradyEdit ===
Portrayed by: Chris Pratt
Owen Grady is one of the four main protagonists of Jurassic World. An on-site staff member at Jurassic World who was formerly in the United States Navy, Owen conducts behavioral research on the park's resident Velociraptors. It is acknowledged that Owen and Claire Dearing, the operations manager at Jurassic World, had a previous relationship consisting of one date, but not a second, due to their conflicting personalities. Owen opposes genetically modifying dinosaurs to increase the appeal factor for audiences.
Owen first appears in the film while training four raptors (Blue, Delta, Echo, and Charlie), that he has been rearing and training since they hatched (so they would imprint on him). Owen is approached by Vic Hoskins, head of security for the bio-engineering company, InGen. Hoskins proposes using raptors as military weapons. Owen objects, explaining that his relationship with the four raptors is a personal one and they only respond to him under controlled conditions. This is demonstrated when he risks his life saving an employee who falls into the raptor paddock. Later, Claire asks Owen to inspect the park's latest attraction, the Indominus rex. Owen criticizes the Indominus's paddock, saying that it has no social interaction besides a feeding crane, while his raptors have each other and him for companionship. At the paddock, it appears that the Indominus rex has escaped, since it is not seen, its heat signature is lost, and there are claw marks on the wall that reach the top. Once inside, however, Owen discovers it is still there, having camouflaged itself and masked its own heat signature. He barely survives, although two staff are killed. When the Indominus rex escapes, Owen demands it be hunted and killed, knowing that it is intelligent, and it tricked them into going into its cage. However, Masrani, the park owner, considers it too valuable and wants it captured alive. Owen and Claire search for her nephews, Zach and Gray, who are exploring the park on their own. Owen is shocked by how little Claire knows about her nephews. While searching for the two boys, he and Claire come across dead and dying Apatosaurus, realizing that the Indominus is killing not for food, but just for 'sport'.
Owen and Claire trail her nephews to the old Jurassic Park Visitor Center where it appears the boys repaired an old jeep and drove off. They barely survive the Indominus and follow Zach and Gray back to the main resort where escaped Pterosaurs are attacking visitors. Owen kills several, but when a Dimorphodon attacks him, Claire shoots it, saving Owen. They reconnect romantically with a kiss, then are reunited with Zach and Gray.
After park owner Masrani's death, Owen learns that Hoskins, backed by his InGen team, has taken charge. Hoskins plans to use the raptors to track the Indominus. At the Velociraptor paddock, an enraged Owen slugs Hoskins for planning to weaponize his animals without his permission. With no other option, he reluctantly agrees to the plan with one condition: that he command the operation. The plan initially works, but backfires when the raptors locate the Indominus and begin communicating with it. Owen realizes that the Indominus has raptor DNA and becomes the new alpha. He is able to rekindle his bond with Charlie, but soldiers kill it with a missile launcher. Only he and one trooper survive the raptors' attack.
Later, Owen, Claire, Zach, and Gray arrive at the laboratory and discover that InGen had cleared the laboratory, taking dinosaur embryos with them. Hoskins reveals his plan to use the Indominus rex as a weapon. Delta appears and kills Hoskins as Owen, Claire and the boys escape. Outside, they are confronted by the other raptors. Owen is able to establish his bond with the raptors. They attack the Indominus, aided by Owen, but Delta and Echo are killed, and Blue seemingly. Claire releases the Tyrannosaurus rex from its paddock and lures it into a fight with the Indominus. Blue, revealing to have survived, returns and attacks the Indominus as it pins down the T. rex. The T. rex and Blue force the Indominus toward the park lagoon where the Mosasaurus grabs and drags it underwater. Owen sees Blue one last time before Blue runs off. Owen and Claire decide they will stay together.


=== Claire DearingEdit ===
Portrayed by: Bryce Dallas Howard
Claire Dearing is the work-centric park operations manager at Jurassic World, a dinosaur theme park owned by InGen. Claire is aunt to Zach and Gray Mitchell. She is the secondary protagonist in the film. The film acknowledges that Claire and Owen Grady once had one date, but never a second, due to her controlling corporate nature and his lax personality.
Claire is first seen attempting to recruit corporate sponsors who want more exciting dinosaurs. She shows them Dr. Henry Wu's newest genetically-modified dinosaur, the Indominus rex. InGen CEO and Park owner Simon Masrani insists that Owen Grady, the Velociraptor trainer to inspect Indominus paddock before it goes on public display. Owen inspects the exhibit but is concerned that the Indominus was raised in total isolation, warning it can cause dangerous aberrant behavior. Owen notices claw marks on the wall and no heat signature is detectable on the thermal cameras. Believing the Indominus escaped, Owen and other staff members inspected the paddock until Claire soon afterwards had its tracking implant located, discovering that it was still in the paddock. When the Indominus escapes, Claire refuses Owen's insistence that it is a highly intelligent animal and must be killed, and she orders its recapture. When the capture attempt resulted in failure and casualties, she then refuses Owen's order to evacuate the park at the consequence of ruining and closing down the park, and instead closes off park sectors and attempts to discreetly relocate the customers back to the resort, but soon realizes that her nephews (whom she left with her assistant) are missing. She enlists Owen's help in finding them, although he is surprised by how little she knows about them, even their ages.
Despite Owen's objections, Claire accompanies him to search for the Indominus and her nephews. While following Zach and Gray's trail, they come across Apatosauruses that have been killed or wounded by the Indominus. While Owen comforts a dying Apatosaurus, Claire emotionally bonds with it, thus erasing her original view towards the park's dinosaurs as "assets". The two follow her nephews to the original Jurassic Park Visitor Center where it appears the boys have repaired an old jeep and driven off. The Indominus attacks but they escape. When the Indominus is finally ordered to be killed, another hunting attempt ends disastrously, and Owen and Claire watch the Indominus break into the park's aviary, freeing all of the pterosaurs. As the escaped pterosaurs attack the customers, Owen and several park hunters attempt to shoot down the flyers. As a Dimorphodon attacks Owen, Claire rescues him, compelling them to romantically kiss. Their moment is cut short by Claire's reunion with Zach and Gray.
Meanwhile, Vic Hoskins and his InGen team have taken control of the park after Masrani is killed. Claire accuses Hoskins of hoping for such a disaster (which was a true accusation that he denied). Owen reluctantly goes along with Hoskins' plan to use the Velociraptors to track and attack the Indominus. However, the raptors communicate with the Indominus, which is revealed to be part raptor hybrid, and they all turn against the humans. Owen, Claire, and the boys escape to the lab, where Hoskins is packing up dinosaur embryos for removal from the island, intending to develop them as weapons, despite the failure of the first field test. Before he can leave, the raptor, Delta, breaks in and kills him. Claire, Owen, and the boys escape, but outside they are cornered by three raptors. Owen is able to rekindle his bond with them, turning them against the Indominus, although they are outmatched. Claire orders the park's Tyrannosaurus rex be released from its paddock and lures it to the Indominus. Although the T. rex is initially overpowered, the lone raptor, Blue, appears and attacks Indominus. The two dinosaurs force Indominus toward the park lagoon where the park's resident Mosasaurus grabs and drags it underwater. After survivors are evacuated from the island, Claire and her sister, Karen, reconcile. Claire and Owen decide they should stay together.


=== Zach MitchellEdit ===
Portrayed by: Nick Robinson
Zach Mitchell is Claire's nephew and Gray's older brother. He and Gray are visiting their Aunt Claire at Jurassic World. When Zach and Gray first arrive, Zach is annoyed by Gray's enthusiasm with the dinosaur exhibits, and mostly ignores him. When Gray becomes upset over their parents' impending divorce, Zach remains unsympathetic, ordering his little brother to grow up. The two boys soon abandon Claire's assistant to explore the park on their own, and Zach becomes a little more amused with the park when he is not preoccupied checking out girls.
The boys board the "gyrosphere" ride, but when Claire closes the park's northern section in response to an emergency and orders all guests to return to the resort, Zach convinces Gray to stay out in the field and even drives the vehicle into a restricted area, where they unfortunately encounter the Indominus. When it attacks the vehicle, Zach and Gray barely survive and jump off a waterfall to escape Indominus. They come upon the decaying original Jurassic Park visitor center. Zach repairs an old jeep and drives it back to the resort area, where they reunite with Claire. Zach survives his experience in Jurassic World and is reunited with his relieved parents.
Zach is easily embarrassed by Gray throughout the film. He has a girlfriend back home, although he constantly checks out other girls at the park, much to the annoyance of Gray, who merely wishes to see and enjoy the park.


=== Gray MitchellEdit ===
Portrayed by: Ty Simpkins
Gray Mitchell is Claire's nephew, Zach's younger brother, and a visitor to Jurassic World. Gray is known for his enthusiastic behavior and his obsession with the park, much to the annoyance of Zach. He is also concerned and upset by his parents' impending divorce.
In the film, Gray is first seen looking at stills of dinosaurs through a projector toy before leaving for his trip. As they approach the park, Gray's hyperactivity and obsession grows as he runs through the approaching ship to see what he can find, as an annoyed Zach just tries to catch up with him. Zach encourages him that they both leave Claire's assistant Zara to further explore the park, as Zach dislikes how Claire is avoiding spending time with them.
They later board the "Gyrosphere" ride, but when Claire closes the park's northern section and orders all visitors to return to the resort, Zach encourages Gray to stay out a while longer. He drives them into a restricted area where they encounter the Indominus. He and Zach escape, then jump off a waterfall to safety. They eventually find the decaying original Jurassic Park visitor center. Working together the brothers restart an old jeep and drive back to the resort. As the resort is under attack by pterosaurs, the boys find Claire and Owen Grady. Zach is amazed and impressed with Owen's survival skills. Gray and his brother survive their ordeal in Jurassic World, and at the end of the film, he and Zach are reunited with their parents.


=== Vic HoskinsEdit ===
Portrayed by: Vincent D'Onofrio
Vic Hoskins is the main human antagonist. He is the head of InGen Security, a security division of the genetics company, InGen. Hoskins wants to use trained Velociraptors as military weapons, and put them through a field test. Raptor trainer and researcher, Owen Grady, objects, saying only he can communicate with them and raptors cannot be tamed to be used as weapons. He later proves this when he is barely able to prevent the raptors from attacking an employee who accidentally fell into their paddock, and he, himself, barely escapes.
Later in the film, the park's latest attraction, the Indominus, escapes its paddock. When Simon Masrani, the park owner, is later killed, Hoskins subsequently takes command and orders that the raptors be used to track and kill the Indominus. Owen reluctantly agrees to his plan, but only if he commands the mission. However, the plan fails when the Indominus, which has velociraptor DNA, becomes the four raptors new alpha, turning them against the humans. Hoskins and the InGen team evacuate the lab, taking the dinosaur embryos. Hoskins reveals to Owen and Claire his plan to make smaller versions of Indominus as profitable war weapons.
Before he can leave, the raptor Delta appears and corners him. Hoskins attempts to mimic Owen's hand signals to assuage Delta; although it briefly works, the raptor fatally mauls him. Ironically, early on in the movie, Delta had stared at Hoskins in a menacing way while he inspected her. Barry, her personal trainer, explained that she only did that when she was hungry. And even before then, when he inspected her a previous time, she hissed and growled at him, taking an immediate dislike towards Hoskins.
In 2014, a viral marketing website for the fictional Masrani Global Corporation was launched to promote Jurassic World. According to the website, Hoskins attained the head position at InGen Security after overseeing the elimination of the Pteranodons that escaped to Canada at the end of Jurassic Park III. Over time, he turned InGen Security into a weapons manufacturer whose products have been successfully used world-wide as well as in Jurassic World.


=== Simon MasraniEdit ===
Portrayed by: Irrfan Khan
Simon Masrani is the CEO of the Masrani Global Corporation and the owner of Jurassic World. In the film, Masrani is first seen piloting a helicopter, discussing Jurassic World with Claire Dearing. When she recites statistics of the park, he makes it clear that he believes that happiness is most important for humans and dinosaurs, but she just reads another statistic. He tells her many great lessons about how one cannot be in control, but she ignores them. He reviews the Indominus rex exhibit with Claire and tells her to fetch Owen Grady, a skilled Velociraptor trainer, to evaluate it. When the Indominus breaks out, Owen wants it killed, but Masrani instead orders it be captured alive due to the costs and potential profits. When most of the ACU team is wiped out, Masrani finally listens to Owen's advice and personally pilots a helicopter to hunt the Indominus, a sharp contrast from original CEO Hammond, who preferred the safety of the command post. The Indominus, outmatched by an aerial threat, breaks open the park's aviary letting loose Pteranodons and Dimorphodons. Masrani tries to fight off the Pterosaurs, but their sheer numbers cause the helicopter to crash, killing Masrani, the copilot, and the door gunner.
In 2014, a viral marketing website for the fictional Masrani Global Corporation was launched to promote Jurassic World. According to the website, Masrani's father, Sanjay Masrani, started the company as a telecommunications business before eventually passing leadership to his son. The business then expanded into the oil industry and bought InGen after the death of John Hammond in 1997 (although in the film, it is said that Masrani and John Hammond were old friends, and that Hammond had bequeathed InGen to Masrani before his death). The website also states that his company promoted Dr. Henry Wu into the Masrani Global Corporation's ranks; and that the company set up a lab in Siberia to search for Cenozoic DNA from old glaciers. The website further states that in 2002, Masrani set out to construct the Jurassic World theme park, which opened on Isla Nublar in 2005. After the Isla Nublar incident, Masrani sought to follow Hammond's initial vision while fixing and improving upon all of the shortcomings that made Jurassic Park a disaster. Masrani made safety the number one priority of Jurassic World.


=== LoweryEdit ===
Portrayed by: Jake Johnson
Lowery is the park's tech-savvy operations overseer. He was a fan of the first Jurassic Park and has even bought an original Jurassic Park T-shirt on eBay. He is scolded by park operations manager Claire Dearing, who states it is in bad taste, owing to the tragic events that took place there. Lowery opposes the idea of genetically modified dinosaurs, believing it goes too far and that the regular dinosaurs from Jurassic Park will always be better. He keeps a collection of toy dinosaurs on his desk, which Owen Grady knocks off after getting frustrated with the operations team.
When the Indominus rex escapes, Lowery strongly opposes Hoskins' plan to capture it. When Masrani is killed and Hoskins assumes command, Lowery remains on duty in the control room, but warns Claire about Hoskins' plan. After the plan fails, Lowery opts to stay while others are evacuated. Lowery tries to kiss his co-worker, Vivian, before she leaves, but she embarrassingly deflects him, saying she has a boyfriend. Instead, he awkwardly hugs her. Claire later orders Lowery to release the Tyrannosaurus rex from its paddock to attack the Indominus. After the Indominus is killed, Lowery is evacuated to the Costa Rican mainland, along with other survivors. Before leaving, he shuts down the control room for good and takes one toy sauropod with him. Lowery serves as the film's comic relief.


=== HamadaEdit ===
Portrayed by: Brian Tee
Hamada is commander of the park's Asset Containment Unit (ACU) division. After the Indominus rex escapes its paddock, Simon Masrani activates the ACU. The team finds the Indominus‍ '​ internal tracking device, ripped out by the dinosaur. As Hamada picks it up, he notices blood dripping from above, and realizes the beast can disguise itself with camouflage. The Indominus emerges from the trees and grabs Hamada. The ACU discharges their weapons, causing the Indominus to drop Hamada. Before he can crawl away, Indominus fatally crushes him with its foot. Hamada is the first ACU team member to be killed by the Indominus.
According to the Jurassic World special edition junior novelization, Hamada was a former SWAT team leader for the Tokyo police.


=== BarryEdit ===
Portrayed by: Omar Sy
Barry is Owen Grady's assistant and friend who cares for the four Velociraptors that Owen is training. He has a close relationship with the raptor, Delta, possibly closer than that of Owen himself; when Delta intently stares at InGen's security head, Hoskins, Barry explains to him that it is how she looks at prey when she is hungry. Like Owen, Barry argues with Vic Hoskins that Velociraptors cannot be used for military use. When Barry is alerted that an "asset" is out of containment, he apparently realizes it is the Indominus rex and states, "They'll never learn." He is the first to find Vic Hoskins' InGen troops and tries to call Owen, but Owen was occupied by the Indominus and did not answer.
Barry drives an ATV during the raptor chase on the Indominus, and he is the first to realize that the raptors are communicating with it. He is later pursued by the raptor, Blue and dives into a hollow log for protection. She attempts to break it open, causing him to draw his pistol in defense. Unable to bring himself to shoot Blue, he instead calls out her name. This briefly rekindles their bond, but she resumes the attack. Owen is able to distract Blue, allowing Barry to escape. He later makes it off the island with the other survivors.


=== ZaraEdit ===
Portrayed by: Katie McGrath
Zara is a British national and Claire Dearing's personal assistant. She is assigned to escort Zach and Gray during their visit to Jurassic World, although she is unenthusiastic. Bored with the less-exciting exhibits that she has been showing them, the two boys slip away to explore the park on their own. When the Pteranodons escape the aviary and attack park visitors, Zara locates the boys, but is grabbed by a Pteranodon and falls into the Mosasaurus lagoon. She is then recaptured by another Pteranodon, which attempts to fly off with her, but the Mosasaurus emerges from the water and grabs the Pteranodon, inadvertently swallowing Zara in the process.


=== VivianEdit ===
Portrayed by: Lauren Lapkus
Vivian works in the Jurassic World control room. She appears to be close to her co-worker Lowery and they are shown having personal conversations. She witnesses the Indominus rex escaping its paddock. When Masrani's helicopter crashes into the Jurassic World aviary, she is grieved by his death. After witnessing Hoskins' failed plan to hunt the Indominus with Velociraptors, Vivian, along with the rest of the staff, is evacuated to Costa Rica. Before she leaves, Lowery, who apparently has been secretly attracted to her, attempts to kiss her but she awkwardly stops him, saying she has a boyfriend.


=== Scott MitchellEdit ===
Portrayed by: Andy Buckley
Scott Mitchell is the father of Zach and Gray, and husband to Karen. He and Karen are in the process of getting a divorce. He is relieved to be reunited with his sons after they are evacuated to Costa Rica.


=== Karen MitchellEdit ===
Portrayed by: Judy Greer
Karen Mitchell is Claire Dearing's sister, Scott's wife, and mother of Zach and Gray. She is proud of her youngest son, Gray's, intellect and frustrated by Zach's occasional meanness to him. Karen begins to break down in tears when talking to Claire after discovering that her sister prefers working to spending quality family time with her nephews, which was what their trip was intended for. Karen and Scott are going through a stressful divorce, but she is later relieved to be reunited with her boys and her sister in Costa Rica.


=== Hal OsterlyEdit ===
Portrayed by: James DuMont
Hal Osterly is the vice-president of Verizon, who wanted to sponsor an attraction at Jurassic World.


== ReferencesEdit ==


=== NotesEdit ===


== External linksEdit ==