The Nickelodeon sitcom iCarly centers on Carly Shay, who creates her own web show with her best friends Sam and Freddie. The series stars Miranda Cosgrove as Carly, Jennette McCurdy as Sam, Nathan Kress as Freddie, Jerry Trainor as Spencer and Noah Munck as Gibby. The series was created by Dan Schneider, who also serves as executive producer.


== Main charactersEdit ==


=== Carly ShayEdit ===
Carly Shay (Miranda Cosgrove) starts as a 13-year-old girl who lives with her older brother, Spencer, in Seattle, Washington.
Carly's best friends are Sam Puckett, Freddie Benson and Gibby Gibson. Carly lives in the "Bushwell Plaza" in apartment 8-C with her funny, often careless, artist brother Spencer Shay.
In "iPilot", Carly takes the heat for one of Sam's pranks and has to oversee people who want to be in the school's talent show. When Carly, Sam, and Freddie's suggestions are completely ignored, they decide to make a web show named iCarly upon Freddie's suggestion, with the 'i' standing for 'internet' and Carly's name since she will be the host of the show.
Carly is a smart, pretty girl who gets good grades, going for straight A's in one episode. She is kind and naive at times, wanting to believe the best in people. She has her moments when she proves just how crazy she can be. Yet in many ways, she is more grown up than her adult brother.
She has occasionally wondered why she and Sam are friends as Sam tends to get her into trouble. Freddie has a crush on Carly, which everyone is aware of. However, she does not feel the same way (which she has told him many times). Despite this, in "iSaved Your Life", Carly wants Freddie to become more than friends because Freddie pushed her out of the way of a truck, getting hit himself instead. Although he was originally eager about their new relationship, Sam later advises him to break up with her. Freddie does so but regrets it later. In "iSpace Out" and "iSam's Mom", it is seen that Carly is claustrophobic. Carly was a vegetarian at one point.
She is the younger sister of Spencer Shay and the daughter of Colonel Steven Shay and Mrs. Shay. She lives with her older brother, Spencer, in Apartment 8-C at Bushwell Plaza in Seattle while their father is stationed on a Navy submarine; their mother has never been seen and was only spoken of once when it was stated that she was in the armed forces. She is the best friend of Sam Puckett and former best friend of Missy Robinson whom she hung out with during her childhood. She is also the best friend of Freddie Benson who lives across the hallway (Apt. 8-D) who has had a crush on her since the day they met. Carly is a kind, easygoing, and caring person who would do anything for her friends, although she can be spoiled at times when she doesn't get her way, especially in "iLook Alike", when Spencer would not approve her going to a mixed martial arts fight, which causes her to go into a tantrum state. In "iDate a Bad Boy", it is shown that she can be shallow, as she had a dislike of Griffin's hobby of collecting Pee Wee Babies (a parody of Beanie Babies).
Occasionally, she is forced to mediate between her best friends, Sam and Freddie. She usually tries not to get in trouble, except for when she takes the blame for Sam's wrongdoing. However, when pushed too far, like in "iHave My Principals", Carly has proven to be just as devious as Sam, which catches most people by surprise because of her generally nice demeanor and the little-known, but generally assumed, fact that she has never pulled a prank by herself until "iGet Pranky" (which she did with Spencer's help).
It was shown in iSpace Out and confirmed in iSam's Mom that Carly suffered from claustrophobia and freaks out when she is locked in a small space for a long period of time; in iPsycho, she appears distressed when Nora locks her, Sam and Freddie in her booth down in her basement.
Possibly her most prominent trait, Carly is not tough, and even when furious, she has never physically attacked anyone on-screen (but tried to tackle Freddie in an angry manner in "iThink They Kissed" and "iPromise Not to Tell"). However, on occasion, she will confront someone, even bullies and teachers, as shown in "iHave a Lovesick Teacher" and "iMake Sam Girlier". She was also part of a girl mob (Sam and Shelby Marx) that beat up Nevel in "iFight Shelby Marx" although Nevel said he wasn't scared of her.
Carly shows singing ability in "iDo", when she sings Shakespeare, and in "iPie", when she tries to get people at a funeral to sing "Amazing Grace".
In "iParty with Victorious", Carly portrayed a character called The "Hideous" Patty Schwab, Carly disguises herself to prevent recognition from fans so they can focus on finding Steven (Carly and Tori's boyfriend). Patty had a British accent. She said she was "Hideous" because of her look, along with Sam and Freddie, who also wore disguises. It is shown that she wears a mask to keep her from snoring. And in "iMeet the First Lady", her father's pet name for her is "Snug Bug." She has a liking for Bad Boys and Kissing boys. She moves to Florence, Italy in the series finale. Although her name is not stated, She is once mentioned in the show Sam & Cat when Sam states her best friend moved to Italy with her dad. She was never mentioned again until the episodes #The Killer Tuna Jump:#Freddie #Jade #Robbie when Mrs. Benson walked in on Freddie while he was talking to Cat over the phone in the hallway. She asked him if he was staring at Carly's apartment door again and reminded him that she was still in Italy with her dad and that she will never love him, and also in the episode SuperPsycho when Nora asks Gibby where Carly is so she can take revenge, Gibby mentions Carly being in Italy with her dad. She is also mentioned when Nevel is in the Mental Institution and he asks about Carly's mother.


=== Sam PuckettEdit ===
Samantha "Sam" Puckett (Jennette McCurdy) is Carly Shay's best friend and in later episodes the ex-girlfriend of Freddie Benson. She co-hosts the show with Carly and handles the sound effect remote control. Sam has an identical twin sister named Melanie. Their mother is Pam Puckett (Jane Lynch). Sam also stated she and her twin sister Melanie were born on a bus due to poor planning by their mother. Pam has also driven off from a gas station and left her children there.
Even though she is a tomboy, prone to aggression, sometimes really violent and almost sadistic, loving pranks, and hating working, she's a nice girl at heart (not always). It is mentioned in the series that she has been arrested three times. In "iWon't Cancel the Show", Sam gets arrested a fourth time after a man cuts in front of her in a market and she shoved a hot chili dog down his pants, only to find out he was the Mexican ambassador and as a result, she is sentenced to juvie for seven days (this is the only episode where Sam does not appear at all). Sam is also portrayed as gluttonous, with a particular love for meat (i.e. fried chicken, ham, bacon, steak, ribs, and pork). One time she went on a meat patch she had at least 7 of them on her arm but still she couldn't resist her meatball. There is a running gag in the show where Sam is prone to say bacon. It was revealed in "iGot a Hot Room" that Sam speaks fluent Italian and she said she can play a trombone (or at least took 3 years of lessons). She's got many stars on her locker, including Drake Bell, Patrick Stump, Pete Wentz, Joe Trohman and Andy Hurley from Fall Out Boy. Sam loves to dance, as shown in "iWas a Pageant Girl", when she did a dance with her former dance coach for the talent portion. Sam reveals that she has a small crush on Spencer and that was what was keeping her from beating him up after numerous pranks performed on her, Freddie, Carly, Gibby, T-Bo, and an old lady. She has a rabid three-legged cat named "Frothy". Sam has proven to have a musical background. In "iParty with Victorious", it is shown that Sam is a skilled rapper.
She occasionally refers to herself as "Momma." In the episode "iWant to Date Freddie" it is stated by Carly that Sam never lies but in the same episode she promised not to tell on Valerie even though she does. Also in "iSaw Him First", the nurse states that she will turn her in and asks her for her name and Sam says Rebecca Berkowitz. Despite her laziness and unhealthy diet, Sam is physically fit and several episodes show her flipping over full grown men or carrying Freddie over her shoulder with ease. She still lives with her mom although she often stays with Carly, as she is dissatisfied with her home life. In the episode "iParty with Victorious", Sam reveals that her father promised his family he would return, but still has not come back since. He is never actually seen or heard.
Sam admits she used to compete in beauty pageants (and came in second in 19 of them) but got suspended for seven years due to her being suspected of "pushing" a candidate, Leann Carter, down a flight of stairs. Sam pushes Carly into doing the pageant when she finds out that Leann is going for her 100th straight win. At the pageant, Sam finds out she can compete because it has been seven and a half years since the ban.
During the first two seasons, Sam has a colorful, boy-like style, often dressing in cargo-capri pants and sweaters. As the series progressed, she begins to change her style. Most prominent in season 4, where on occasion she wears skinny legged jeans and heels. This shows she is aging and she is showing her girly side.
Sam tends to insult any other girl who has a crush on Freddie. Despite having dated boys before, she still shares her first kiss with Freddie. In "iSaved Your Life", she gets upset when she tells Spencer that Freddie got hit by a taco truck (even throwing down the pizza Spencer was holding when he thought she was tricking him so he would let his guard down and she could beat him in their game of "Assassin"), although she proceeds to help herself to a taco (bought from the same taco truck that hit Freddie) afterwards. In "iOMG", it is revealed that she is in love with Freddie, as she kisses him with passion. "iLost My Mind" would feature them finally together continuing "iOMG" when Carly saw Freddie and Sam kissing. In "iLost My Mind" Sam checks herself into a mental hospital because she thinks she is insane for being in love with Freddie. When Carly, Sam, and Freddie had to tape a show of iCarly in the hospital, Carly wanted to get the iCarly fans to see if Sam and Freddie should go out. After the iCarly fans are saying that Sam and Freddie should go out, Freddie then records himself saying that no one has asked how he feels. Sam, of course, thinks this is his chance to get back at her and embarrass her. In the middle of yelling at him, Freddie walks over to her and kisses her.
Then in "iDate Sam and Freddie", they kept arguing, while Carly helped them get along, and eventually they would make-up and kiss afterwards. When Sam and Freddie go on their date, they get in an argument again. Carly tries to settle it but she gets frustrated, and tells them maybe they aren't meant to be, leaving the episode a cliff-hanger. In "iCan't Take it", Gibby and Freddie's mom try to break Sam and Freddie up. They didn't break up but they did get in an argument which caused Freddie to think that he should break up with her. But Carly convinces Freddie that Sam would never try to hurt him. Or ruin his chances of getting in NERD camp. Even though before Sam did sabotage his application to be in NERD camp. Freddie and Sam make-up and kiss. In "iLove You", Sam and Freddie try each other's hobbies. Freddie invites Sam to hang out with him at his club "Training Bros". Sam makes Freddie get kicked out by accident. So Sam invites Freddie to see her Uncle Carmine and cousin Chaz in prison. Freddie gets caught with ham in his pants, which causes Carmine and Chaz to get sent away by the police. Sam warns Freddie that they might stab him later on. After that, Sam and Freddie overhear Carly talking to Spencer and Jenna about their relationship. Freddie and Sam feel as if Carly was talking about their relationship. So Sam and Freddie finally come to closure on the past episodes "iKiss", "iOMG" and "iLost my Mind". And they decide that maybe later on if they ever become mature about a relationship, they'll get back together. So they decide to break-up. When Sam gets off the elevator, Freddie tells her that he loves her for the first time. Sam tells him she loves him too, and they kiss. When Freddie sees what time it is (10:30 p.m.), Sam suggests they break-up at midnight so they can have an excuse to kiss for the last time.
In the last episode of iCarly, "iGoodbye", Carly leaves to live in Italy with her dad and she and Sam take a break from their web show.


=== Freddie BensonEdit ===
Fredward "Freddie" Benson (Nathan Kress) is the technical producer for the web-show iCarly which stars his friends Carly Shay and Sam Puckett. He is often the scapegoat when it comes to Sam's bad ideas. It is revealed that he has had a crush on Carly since the 6th grade, but Carly generally only regards him as her best friend. However, in "iSaved Your Life", Carly falls for him after he saves her from getting run over by a taco truck. Freddie breaks up with her and says that if Carly still loves him and would still want to be his girlfriend when "the whole hero thing dies down", he would "be very psyched about it." At the end of this episode, Freddie is shown in the elevator asking himself, "What did I do?"
Like Carly, Freddie is shown to get high grades in school, although his talents are on a more technological basis; thus, he is somewhat of a nerd. When explaining a certain technology that Carly and Sam do not know about, he tends to speak in terms that neither Carly nor Sam can comprehend, and thus, this is one of the sources of Sam's constant ridicule of Freddie. He is shown as being a very effective producer, though he is given little credit for iCarly's popularity. Sam eventually somewhat realizes his vital role to the webcast when a girl named Valerie makes him her technical producer instead, and iCarly is greatly hindered as a result. It is also known that Freddie is interested in studying multiple foreign languages, including French, Spanish, and Portuguese. From the second season on, he is frequently heard exclaiming phrases in Spanish. In one episode, it is mentioned that Freddie has a living grandfather.
Freddie's relationship with his mom is a very strained one. She means well, but can be overprotective. At the end of the day, though, they love each other. In iGo to Japan, it is revealed that he has a GPS chip in his head she implanted him in Venezuela due to his mother being overprotective of him, which was used to find them after they were ditched by two Japanese people near Tokyo. Her constant overbearing eventually drove Freddie to temporarily move out of their apartment, and he remained there until his mother begged him to come back. Freddie agreed as long as she unblocked his favorite channels and left him alone in public. His father is not mentioned, much like Carly's mother.
Freddie's relationship with Sam in the first season shows a strong dislike for each other. They have become more civil to one another as the series progresses to the point of them only arguing when they are around other people. Freddie constantly finds himself on the wrong end of Sam's demeanor and his near-psychotic mother's over-protectiveness. Throughout the series, Sam insults him, causes physical harm to him, or pulls pranks on him without hesitation, and also insults any girl who is attracted to him. But they both care for each other. Freddie gradually gets used to this so much so that in "iKiss", he stated that "his life would feel too weird if she didn't make him miserable all the time" and kisses Sam after they mutually compromise to "get their first kiss over with". In "iReunite With Missy", Sam asks for Freddie's help and when Carly finds out she says to Freddie, "You care about Sam" which shows that despite her constant abuse, he sees her as a good friend. In "iOMG", he tests out his new app that tells you your mood, on Sam, and it said in love. He assumes it is their new intern, Brad and tells Carly. But at the end of the episode Sam kisses Freddie, revealing she was in love with him. When the kiss is over Sam says, "Sorry." Freddie then says, "It's cool," with mixed emotions of confusion and gladness on his face. The episode ends there leaving Freddie unsure of his feelings for Sam. "iLost My Mind" features them finally together continuing "iOMG" when Carly sees Freddie and Sam kissing. Freddie kisses her live on iCarly at the end of the episode showing that he does, in fact, reciprocate Sam's feelings. Then in "iDate Sam and Freddie", they kept arguing, while having Carly help them get along. They eventually made up afterwards. In "iCan't Take It", Gibby and Freddie's mom try to break Sam and Freddie up by revealing to Freddie that Sam sabotaged his application for NERD (New Electronics Research and Development) Camp, thus ruining his chances of getting in. They didn't break up but Freddie was devastated, leading him to seriously consider a break up. Luckily, Carly (feeling guilty about helping Mrs. Benson and Gibby and not wishing for her best friends to be unhappy) convinces Freddie that Sam would never try to hurt him and that she loves him. Freddie changes his mind and the two make up.
In "iLove You", Sam and Freddie try each other's hobbies. Freddie invites Sam to hang out with him at his club "Training Bros". Sam makes Freddie get kicked out by accident. So Sam invites Freddie to see her Uncle Carmine and cousin Chaz in prison. Freddie gets caught with ham in his pants, which causes Carmine and Chaz to get sent away by the police. Sam warns Freddie that they might stab him later on. After that, Sam and Freddie overhear Carly talking to Spencer and Jenna about their relationship. Freddie and Sam feel as if what Carly said also applied to their relationship. So Sam and Freddie finally come to closure on the past episodes "iKiss, iOMG" and "iLost my Mind". And they decide that maybe later on, if Freddie becomes more weird or Sam becomes more normal, they'll get back together. So they mutually decide to break-up. When Sam gets off the elevator, Freddie tells her that he loves her for the first time. And Sam tells him she loves him too, and they kiss. When Freddie sees what time it is, 10:30, Sam suggests they break-up at midnight so they can have an excuse to kiss for the last time.
In "iGoodbye", Freddie first assumes that Sam wants to reunite with him as a couple when she calls him, but then turns his attention to making Carly happy by offering to take her to the Father-Daughter Dance with Gibby, although both of them are rejected by Carly's sobbing. After Colonel Shay appears and escorts her to and back from the event, he announces he has to leave, eventually leading Carly to decide upon moving to Florence, Italy with him. In the studio, Freddie packs up his equipment, and starts telling Carly about helping Gibby take care of his new pet weasel when Carly places her hand on his. The two of them end up sharing a final kiss before she leaves.
In February 2014, Freddie guest stars in the crossover spin-off Sam & Cat episode "#TheKillerTunaJump". Sam's roommate and co-worker, Cat Valentine, calls him out of jealousy, after Sam begins to bond with Cat's friend, Jade West. Sam later calls Cat's close friend and long-term crush, Robbie Shapiro, and kisses him out of spite. Freddie and Robbie later discover that they are being used so Robbie decides to hang around with Freddie, much to his irritation, as he finds him very weird. After falling into a giant fish tank and being bitten by vicious tuna fish, Freddie and Robbie end up in the hospital, leading to everyone calling a truce. At the end of the episode, Sam suggests they catch up when he gets better and then she and Cat leaves the hospital and Freddie is seen pressing his emergency button, when Robbie, who was in the bed next to him, starts playing a very annoying song on his guitar.


=== Spencer ShayEdit ===
Spencer Shay (Jerry Trainor) is Carly's immature, childish, eccentric older brother. When Carly's dad was called overseas, she went to live with Spencer, who turned their loft into both a workspace and gallery for his wacky sculptures. Spencer is off-beat and rarely acts his age, but acts responsibly and seriously when it counts. Though often spontaneous and unreliable, Spencer has been shown as being extremely protective of Carly, especially in episodes such as "iQuit iCarly", when he sees Carly about to fall off a window washer platform and sprints to her rescue, and "iLook Alike", when he would not approve her going to a mixed martial arts fight. In "iWanna Stay with Spencer", when Carly was being sent to live with her grandfather against her and Spencer's wishes, Spencer gives their grandfather Carly's asthma inhaler, despite her not having an asthma attack since she was seven. He tells their grandfather that he had kept all these years in case she needed it and demands he takes it with them, but after seeing how much Spencer really cares about Carly by keeping the inhaler all this time, their grandfather allows her to stay with him. In the alternate reality shown in "iChristmas," it is revealed that if Spencer was born "normal," Carly would have never met Sam and Freddie, Sam would be stuck in a juvenile detention center, Spencer would be engaged to Marissa Benson, and iCarly would not exist.
In addition to making sculptures, he has been shown to be an incredibly talented artist; while trying to teach Carly to draw in "iMust Have Locker 239", he quickly draws a professional-looking rabbit without even looking at the pad, much to Carly's amazement. However, when Spencer tries to get involved in something besides sculpting, it tends to spontaneously set itself on fire as a running gag, despite the object usually not being flammable (such as a cymbal). He is often the focus of the subplot for each episode, in which he usually finds himself in a strange situation. An odd interest of his is dressing up like a woman seen in "iWant My Website Back" and in "iLost My Mind". He also enjoys drinking milk in the shower, as stated in the episode "iGot A Hot Room".
In several episodes, it is stated that Spencer went to law school (because of his father's wishes) for three days before dropping out. Spencer did not tell his father that, claiming that he is busy. His dad eventually finds out in "iGoodbye"
Spencer is constantly being attacked and tortured by a trouble-making boy, who lives in the apartment building, named Chuck Chambers. The conflict started when he was covering for the doorman Lewbert in "iHurt Lewbert". Chuck has been seen in several episodes as a worthy enemy, because of his "sweet" personality, and martial arts skills.
He has also had numerous girlfriends throughout the series, including Veronica from a grocery store (whom he has had a crush on since he first saw her) in "iMake Sam Girlier" and a very high class woman in "iWon't Cancel The Show".
It is revealed that Spencer pulled numerous pranks during his youth in "iGet Pranky". After helping Carly pull a prank, his love for it was reignited, and he soon began to set up constant pranks at the expense of almost everyone, especially Carly. At her wit's end, Carly calls some of his old school friends (all of whom that came were victims from one of his pranks) to talk him out of his refueled habit. When she leaves, however, they resort to beating up Spencer since they still haven't forgiven him for it. Despite this, Spencer gets the message. In "iParty with Victorious" it is shown that Spencer has a book club with only ladies. To Carly, Sam, and Freddie's amazement they think that it is not the most manly thing in the world, Spencer also agrees. In "iLost my Mind" this book club reappears, exchanging fruit tart recipes, however he is later kicked out after setting a box of books on fire.


=== GibbyEdit ===
Orenthal "Gibby" Cornelius Gibson (Noah Munck) is a friend and classmate of Carly, Sam, and Freddie and the show's breakout character. Due to his odd personality and chubby appearance, he is an outcast at school, although he does have a few friends. He used to be known for taking off his shirt in almost all episodes he appeared in. Since Season 4, he has not taken his shirt off and stated in "iStill Psycho", he said he takes his shirt off "less frequently now." He often appears on iCarly to assist Carly, Sam, and Freddie. Gibby started off as an occasional recurring character of the show, but was promoted to a main character by Season 4. Gibby has a little brother named Guppy (played by Munck's younger brother), who is seen in the episodes "iPsycho", "iSell Penny Tees", "iDo", "iStart a Fan War", and "iBust a Thief". In "iMove Out", he has a pet bulldog named Grubbles. A running gag in many episodes usually has many characters yelling "Gibby!" to him, either when they are aggravated or annoyed by him. Since becoming a series regular, Gibby often announces his presence upon entering a room with his own name deepened voice: "Gibbeh!" It was revealed in the episode, "iStill Psycho", that his birth name is Orenthal Gibson.
Much like Freddie, he is often a victim of Sam's pranks, but she has shown to have more respect for him. In "iSpeed Date", his last name is finally revealed as Gibson at his house's postbox saying "The Gibsons" and reveals he has a girlfriend named Tasha. A very attractive girl, she only has small part in the episode. This surprised Carly, Sam, and Freddie, because they feel that Tasha is somewhat out of Gibby's league. In "iEnrage Gibby", Tasha returns and has a larger role, showing much affection towards Gibby, it also implies that she is at least 16 years old after Gibby said he would walk her to her car. In this episode, Gibby is shown to be ruthless and jealous, but in a comedic way. He is also shown to be a skilled kickboxer. Gibby is portrayed to be a very capable fighter, almost to the level of Sam, as shown in "iPsycho", where he succeeds in breaking into and smashing down a barricaded door. In the episode "iCan't Take It", Gibby is shown to be a strong singer when he serenades Sam and Freddie after he has a change of heart about trying to break them up. He also reveals in "iMeet the First Lady" that he thought Spencer was her father. He says this again in "iGoodbye".
His mom Charlotte went on a date with Spencer in "iFix a Pop Star", but they broke up because he looked too much like Carly to her and she looked too much like Gibby to him. His parents are divorced. He also has some emotional problems because he is the main target for most bullies (mostly Sam in the first three seasons).
He is a very good friend with Spencer. In "iKiss", he became Carly's replacement in Spencer's football training. In "iCarly Awards", Spencer gave him the awards and he gave them to Carly and Sam. In "iQuit iCarly", he became Spencer's "boat boy" and he helped him defeat the Pirates. In "iPsycho", Spencer finds out that Gibby is not allowed to go to the camp anymore, so he cheers him up by inviting him to "Camp Spencer". In "iGot a Hot Room" his grandpa gives Spencer a haircut. In "iSell Penny-Tees", he introduces Spencer to Fugtor, his bus driver from Uzbekistan, for translating the phrases of Krustacia, Spencer's potential girlfriend from Uzbekistan, but the driver only spoke Uzbek and ended up falling for Krustacia, much to Spencer's dismay. In "iOMG", Gibby felt bad about hurting Spencer in the experiment. In "iParty with Victorious", he revealed he is skilled in massage therapy by aiding Spencer, so Spencer refused to drive the rest of the gang to Los Angeles unless Gibby was allowed to accompany them. Gibby also hosts the show with Carly and Sam doing things with sets.
Gibby also proclaims in "iSaved Your Life" that he and his family don't have cable television. Gibby imagines his fantasy marriage to Cat Valentine as a rabbi-officiated culturally Jewish wedding ceremony, with Gibby's stand-in wearing a yarmulke and breaking the glass.


== Recurring charactersEdit ==


=== Marissa BensonEdit ===
Marissa Benson (Mary Scheer) is Freddie's stereotypically overprotective, and sensitive safe-cautious mom, first appearing in "iWanna Stay with Spencer". She constantly treats her son like a child and is very worried about him getting hurt or having relationships with girls (especially Carly), but in "iWill Date Freddie", she wanted Carly to love him. Marissa constantly embarrasses Freddie in public, often by making him follow all of her strange rules that she has. In the episode "iMove Out", it is revealed that her pregnancy with Freddie lasted eleven months. She does not seem to care about other people's apologies as seen in the special "iSaved Your Life". She has a somewhat negative relationship with Carly and Spencer, except for "iParty with Victorious," when she and Carly actually have a nice conversation. She doesn't really have a negative relationship with Sam however. In addition to the episodes named above, she has appeared in "iWanna Stay With Spencer", "iNevel", "iStakeout", "iCarly Saves TV", "iFence", "iHurt Lewbert", "iGo to Japan", "iPie", "iChristmas", "iLook Alike", "iFind Lewbert's Lost Love", "iMove Out", "iBloop", "iBeat The Heat", "iSam's Mom," "iWill Date Freddie", "iParty with Victorious", "iCan't Take It", "iQ", "iStill Psycho", "iBalls", "iToe Fat Cakes", "iOpen a Restaurant", "iShock America", "iGet Banned", and "iGoodbye". She also has a fear of germs shown in iToe Fat Cakes and iCan't Take It.


=== LewbertEdit ===
Lewbert Sline (Jeremy Rowley) is the mean, vain doorman of Carly's apartment. He has a large, noticeable wart on his left cheek. In "iFind Lewbert's Lost Love", he reveals that the wart developed because of his abusive ex-fiancee, Marta. Her over-obsessiveness caused Lewbert to change his middle and last name, lose his good looks, his job as a supermodel, move to Seattle, and go crazy. He is later sent to jail (by smacking a police officer on the face and "admitting" that he was the one who was stealing the TV remotes) so he can escape Marta.
He is featured on the bit "Messin' with Lewbert" on iCarly, in which Carly, Sam and Freddie pull pranks on him, once going so far that they accidentally blew his wart off his face with an "exploding muffin basket", made to shoot confetti, but blew up as an explosive. Afterwards, he had a short-lived romance with Freddie's mother. However, this did not last because of his attitude after Freddie fell down the stairs while wearing "open-toed shoes", which was actually a ruse by Carly and Sam to end the relationship. Lewbert is loosely based on an enraged customer Rowley played in a "Blockblister" segment on The Amanda Show. Lewbert appears in: "iWant More Viewers", "iWanna Stay with Spencer", "iScream on Halloween", "iHeart Art", "iHurt Lewbert", "iGo to Japan", "iTake On Dingo", "iFind Lewbert's Lost Love", "iEnrage Gibby" and "iBeat the Heat" and he was later mentioned in Season 4 episode, "iHire an Idiot." He is not seen or mentioned in Season 5 but he returns in the sixth season premiere, "iApril Fools" and the series finale, "iGoodbye". In iGoodbye Lewbert was sick and sneezed on Spencer, which in return made Spencer sick.


=== T-BoEdit ===
Terrence "T-Bo" Bo (BooG!e) is the manager at the Groovy Smoothie (a parody of Jamba Juice). He often tries to get his customers to buy random foods as well as smoothies, such as bagels, bell peppers, doughnuts and pickles. These foods are always skewed onto a stick. T-Bo says he has a degree in "Smoothology". He is a close friend of Carly, Spencer, and the rest of the gang. After "iQ", he rents a room from Mrs. Benson.
T-Bo appears in: "iWant my Website Back", "iDate a Bad Boy", "iTwins", "iCook", "iSpeed Date", "iHave my Principals", "iQuit iCarly", "iGot a Hot Room", "iSam's Mom", "iGet Pranky", "iSell Penny-Tees", "iDate Sam & Freddie", "iQ", "iStill Psycho", "iMeet the First Lady", in the Extended Version of "iParty with Victorious" as the panda, later shown in a commercial, "iApril Fools", "iGo One Direction", "iOwn a Restaurant", "iHalfoween", "iBattle Chip", "iGet Banned", "iBust a Thief" and "iGoodbye". He is presumably a fan of One Direction as he took a photo of them when they were at the Groovy Smoothie with the iCarly Gang.


=== SockoEdit ===

Socko is a friend of Spencer who is mentioned in several episodes, though is never seen in person. He and Spencer were friends in high school. He is known most for making all of Spencer's brightly colored, light-up socks, first seen in "iWant More Viewers". All members of Socko's family mentioned have names that match their jobs or hobbies and are also off-screen characters; such as Tyler, who makes ties; Otto, a used car salesman; Rob, a professional thief; Penny, who creates Penny-Tees; Isaac, an optometrist; Taylor, a tailor; Bernie, a professional welder; Boomer, who sells explosives; and Ryder, who is a motorcycle rider. Like Carly and Spencer's mother and most of Freddie and Sam's family members, Socko and most of his family members have never been seen in the show in person except for Rob who stole back Carly and Spencer's couch and Bernie who burnt a pickle on iCarly.


=== Nevel PappermanEdit ===
Nevel Amadeus Papperman (Reed Alexander) is one of the most reoccurring antagonists in the iCarly series, running the popular review website Nevelocity.com and tending to have a "posh" personality which includes dressing formally all the time. First appearing in "iNevel", Nevel reveals to have a crush on Carly and initially offered to interview her in order to get close to her, but got spurred by her and since made it his secondary goal to ruin the iCarly gang with complex plans that hide his involvement at first. Despite his intelligence, most of his plans backfire with him suffering in some way while his website presumably loses creditability due to his corrupt, vindictive nature. It is revealed in the episode "iGive Away a Car" that his dream is to open his own haberdashery. While absent from season 3 except for archived footage from "iBloop", Nevel returns in the season 4 episode "iPity The Nevel" where he pleas the iCarly gang to restore his reputation after a video of him yelling at a little girl goes viral. Unfortunately, another video of Nevel losing his temper with a man in a wheelchair goes viral and ruins his image.
Resurfacing in "iHalfoween", the iCarly gang not helping him with the backlash from the second viral video, Nevel exacts revenge by giving Carly and Sam candies that made their voices annoyingly deep, and later framed Freddie for it. However, after Freddie was punished, Carly states that she now acknowledges that Nevel's attack on them today was provoked, and after being nice to Nevel and making his two bodyguards disappear, he is finally punished himself. This infers that he never appeared again. He also appears in the self-titled video game.
In the spin-off series Sam & Cat, Nevel is revealed to have been placed in a mental institution in Los Angeles after contracting Porcupox from the porcupine he kept as a pet. While he help Sam figure out Nora's location, Nevel escaped the hospital and went back to Seattle.


=== ChuckEdit ===
Chuck Chambers (Ryan Ochoa) made an appearance in "iHurt Lewbert", when playing racquetball in the lobby, which Spencer got him grounded for by his father for two days. Since then, Chuck and Spencer became rivals and have clashed on several more occasions each time ending with Spencer winning and Chuck getting in trouble with his father except in "iFind Lewbert's Lost Love". In "iReunite With Missy," he was grounded once again for trapping Spencer in the basement. He has a wide variety of what Spencer describes as "suspicious liquids" such as a substance he squirted Spencer with and a jelly-like goo which he put into Spencer's motorcycle helmet. He reappears in "iBeat the Heat", where he comes to the Shays' apartment with his dad and sister, Gia, who Spencer finds attractive. Chuck also appears in "iReunite with Missy" and "iTwins". As revealed in "IBattle Chip", Chuck's latest prank on Spencer got him sent to military school and so his younger brother Chip took over as Spencer's nemesis. He has an older sister named Gia and a younger Brother named Chip who appears in iBattle Chip. He doesn't appear in any more episodes after "iBeat the Heat", probably due to Ryan's commitments on filming Pair of Kings and because Chuck is now in military school.


=== GuppyEdit ===
Guppy Gibson (Ethan Munck) is Gibby's younger brother. He appears in "iPsycho", coming over to Carly's house to stay with his brother, who is staying at "Camp Spencer". Guppy later frees the iCarly gang from a recording booth while Gibby distracts Nora (the girl who trapped the iCarly gang). Guppy is played by Noah Munck's real-life brother, Ethan. Like Gibby, Guppy likes taking his shirt off, but unlike Gibby, he rarely talks and is mostly shown speaking into Gibby's ears. In addition to "iPsycho", Guppy also appears in "iSell Penny Tees" when he was on the iCarly webcast, "iDo" when he was riding in his little flame car that is attached to Gibby's bike, in "iStart A Fan War" in which he, Gibby, and their grandfather are driving to Webicon. His signature phrase (towards Gibby) is, "Happy birthday!"; when Carly, Sam, and Freddie are trapped in Nora's basement in "iPsycho", they make a code and send it to Gibby, in which "every fourth word" is a code phrase. He also appears to have psychological problems because in "iStart A Fan War" he says he "hears voices again". He reappears two seasons later in episode "iBust a Thief".


=== CharlotteEdit ===
Charlotte Gibson (Deena Dill) is Gibby's attractive mother. She was dating Spencer in "iFix a Pop Star", but he broke up with her because he thinks she looks too much like her son Gibby and causing her to think of his resemblance to Carly. She appears also in "iGo Nuclear" when Sam gives Gibby a wedgie and she needed to give him his new underwear, "iPsycho" when Gibby went to Camp Spencer in Spencer and Carly's Loft, and in "iEnrage Gibby" offering Gibby a snack while he was punching a punching bag.


== Ridgeway Junior High SchoolEdit ==


=== FacultyEdit ===
Principal Ted Franklin (Tim Russ) is the school principal, who is fond of Carly and Freddie. Principal Franklin is sometimes fond of Sam because he loves iCarly. As seen in "iHave My Principals", Principal Franklin has a daughter named Emily who is an iCarly fan. Principal Franklin appears in "iPilot", "iPromise Not To Tell", "iGot Detention", "iOwe You", "iMust Have Locker 239", "iHave My Principals" and his voice was heard in "iOMG". He makes a return in the Season 6 episode "iOpen a Restaurant" where he allows Gibby to keep the restaurant he opened in the old school basement after denying Mr. Howard's request to have it closed.
Ms. Francine Briggs (Mindy Sterling) is a mean English teacher that Carly and her friends like to tease, and one of Spencer's former teachers. She first appeared in "iPilot". It is revealed in the episode "iSpy A Mean Teacher" that she likes to exercise in her swimsuit and she is obsessed with Randy Jackson. She returned in Season 3's episode "iHave My Principals" and makes a brief appearance in "iBelieve in Bigfoot". She plays the bagpipes, much to the hatred of the students, and feels that iCarly is bad for the young society. She has a bullhorn, and commonly uses it in the school hallways. Ms. Briggs doesn't return to the series for seasons 4 and 5, but she returns in the season six premiere, "iApril Fools". She is in love with Mr. Howard and they like to kiss in the teacher's lounge in their spare time after school. She is also the school's former co-principal.
Mr. Howard (David St. James) is a mean math teacher and detention moderator with an extremely unpleasant personality. A vindictive, hateful, perpetually angry person that hates practically everything – laughter, children, and even his wife. Everyone at Ridgeway, including Carly and her friends as well as Principal Franklin, dislike him, and the feeling is mutual. In recent episodes however, he has shown some respect towards Carly, Freddie, and Gibby (not to Sam, though). He appears in "iParty with Victorious" when he seems very fond of Steven (Carly's boyfriend). Later he catches Carly and Sam texting in class and force them to say their texting conversation to the class. Sam later states she texted "colon P" (:P) to Carly, and Mr. Howard says he knows all about "Cole and Pete", which makes the class laugh and Mr. Howard confused on the joke. He returns in the episode "iOpen a Restaurant" where he finds out about the secret food joint Gibby had opened in the old school basement. He convinces Principal Franklin (who is there enjoying himself) to close it down to which Franklin agrees to do. It's not until Mr. Howard leaves the basement that Principal Franklin blind-sides his request and tells Gibby to keep it open. It is rumoured his wife broke up with him for cheating on her. He is in love with Ms. Briggs and they like to kiss in the teacher's lounge a lot as mentioned in iTwins. He is the former co-principal of Ridgeway Middle School.
Mr. Devlin (Adrian Neil) is a history teacher at Ridgeway Middle School. He is known for being snotty and very strict to his students, even in his former position as lunchroom monitor. He also despises 3-hole punched paper, as revealed to Carly in the episode "iPromise Not to Tell", when he keeps Carly from getting straight "A"s by giving her a "B" on a history paper making Carly get a "B+" for the semester. He teaches very fast, and if ever asked to slow down, he says no and keeps talking. He also made an appearance in the episode "iKiss", when he tried to help Freddie stand up for himself and shouts "I am Freddie Benson and I have never kissed a girl!", causing everyone to laugh. Embarrassed and running away to avoid being responsible for the outburst, he tells everyone to stop laughing, and calls Freddie an "unfortunate misfit" while he runs off. He is from England, which explains his accent.
Miss Lauren Ackerman (Jessica Makinson) is a mentally unstable, verbally abusive, and possibly bipolar history teacher at Ridgeway. She only appeared in the episode "iHave A Lovesick Teacher", where she temporarily dated Spencer after her former boyfriend dumped her. Anytime she is dumped, she is extremely mean, abusive and unforgiving to her students, in ways such as giving them large homework assignments on chapters they have not read, and giving people F's on quizzes without letting them be taken. While dating Spencer, however, she is kind and giddy, even suggesting that her class go ice skating. She is often possessive, needing to know where Spencer is at all times during the day. When Spencer breaks up with her, she goes back to being crazy and this time making the primary characters do ridiculous punishments, such as making Carly and Freddie do jumping jacks during class and making Sam wash her car. She is arrested for admitting on iCarly that she illegally downloaded 500 songs on her PearPod (parody of the iPod) for Spencer as a present. It was actually a set-up by Carly and her friends to put an end to everybody's misery.
Mr. Stern (Joseph Buttler) is a teacher at Ridgeway Middle School. He is very strict and usually seen coming out of the teacher's lounge when there is an emergency. Not much of his personal life is revealed, although in "iSpy A Mean Teacher", it is learned that he went to a rock concert and crowdsurfed (and wore shorts, which according to Carly, teachers should never do). In addition to that episode, he was in "iLike Jake", "iDon't Want to Fight", "iGot Detention", "iMake Sam Girlier" and "iSaved Your Life".
Mr. Henning (Andrew Hill Newman) is a hippie science teacher at Ridgeway Middle School. Spencer once had him as a science teacher, but complained that Mr. Henning smelled like rotting wood. He stresses the importance of being environmentally friendly, but does so in the wrong ways, and as a result, he tends to give the majority of his students poor grades because they were doing what is supposed to be correct, but not correct by his standards (e.g. in "iGo Nuclear", Freddie created a high-tech and expensive composting machine, but was marked down for polluting the air by importing worms from Portugal). He is later mentioned in "iBeat the Heat".
Superintendent Harold Gorman (Weston Blakesley) is a Superintendent at Ridgeway Middle School and Principal Franklin's boss, and appeared in "iHave My Principals". He has an abnormally low voice, which at first, stunned Sam. He also appears to have a strong hatred of fun, and fires Franklin simply for appearing on iCarly and playing one of their games, something he feels is below a principal, but proves he has a big heart when he rehires Franklin later in the episode.
Mr. Wimbley (William Cowart) appears in "iPromise Not to Tell" as the computer teacher, where Carly distracted him so Freddie could hack the school's network firewall. He is known to have a surly personality, particularly when he tells his students to complete exercises 7 and 9. When Carly asks Wimbley about exercise 8, Wimbley exclaims in a whiny voice "I'm in charge!".
Mr. Connick (Jonathan Spencer) was a teacher who recommended Carly to go to his brother-in-law Dr. Rick Schaffer, who is a plastic surgeon, because he thinks Shelby Marx will disfigure Carly's face in "iFight Shelby Marx".
Ms. Gatlind appears in "iHate Sam's Boyfriend" dressed in a chicken costume, because she said if all of the students in her class received a good grade, she would. After she does, Sam cracks on her and says, "What if a chicken dressed as a teacher?!?"
Mr. Paladino (Randall Park) appears in "iGot Detention" when Freddie steals his stapler. After seeing Freddie with the stapler, he simply takes it back and Freddie goes unpunished.
Mrs. Rosenthal (Missy Doty) is a lazy math teacher who appears in "iGot Detention" when Carly loosens the bolts on her chair. She says that she will get 2 months recovery, and leaves careless and without any injuries.
Nurse Vullen (Marylin Sue Perry) is seen on "iSaw Him First" when Sam pretends to faint so Shane could kiss her. She tries to shock Sam awake, but Sam stops her. Nurse Vullen angrily states she is going to report Sam to the principal and asks for her name. Sam lies and says she is Rebecca Berkowitz (Katherine M. Ellis).
Ms. Murdock (Joan Huddleson) is seen on "iReunite With Missy" passing by Carly's, Sam's, and Missy's lockers. She wears very poor fashioned makeup, including sky blue eyeliner and heavy pink lip wear.
Mr. Newman is a science teacher. He is never seen in person, but mentioned on iCarly.com. Sam mentions in a blog that she is going to bribe him into taking away an "F" he gave her in exchange for her returning the class hamster, which she found while cleaning her room.
Mr. Sumack is a science teacher mentioned in "iHatch Chicks". Sam says that he was the teacher who assigned Carly and Sam to their science project. He has never been seen on the show.
Mrs. Walker (Lisa K. Wyatt) is a biology teacher who appears on "iCarly Saves TV" when the producer comes to take the gang and she is proud to meet a producer.
Mrs. Guntrell is a teacher who gives Carly an "F" for writing a report on Bigfoot.
Ms. Lovenson is a drama teacher who gave Sam a "D-" for her play, "The Prisoner who Just Wanted Some Soup and the Man who Refused to Give Him Some".


=== StudentsEdit ===
Missy Robinson (Haley Ramm) was Carly's best friend, because both of their fathers were stationed at the same naval base at Seal Beach when they were 7, all before Carly met Sam. In "iReunite with Missy", she constantly tries to get rid of Sam so she can be Carly's best friend again. Carly finds out about her plan and ends her friendship with her. She left for a six-month sea cruise, which Freddie originally won and gave to her to get rid of her threat to iCarly, and vomited because of her seasickness.
Valerie (Carly Bondar) was Freddie's girlfriend in "iWill Date Freddie", but was actually using him for her webshow so that it could overshadow iCarly. When Sam and Carly found out about this, Freddie did not believe them, but later talked to Valerie, who revealed the truth. She was able to manipulate people; her actions were evident in attempting to use Sam as well for her webshow, and trying to get Carly to give up her show. At the end of the episode, on her webshow (called "The Valerie Show"), Valerie was supposed to show her recent trip from Idaho, but the monitor fell on her head, and she said "I don't know what to do now." She was not seen after that, but was mentioned in "iKiss", as Freddie briefly kissed her.
Jeremy (Nathan Pearson) is a sick kid who is known as "Germy" because he has been constantly sneezing and coughing since first grade. Like Freddie, he is also fascinated with electronics, and was the cameraman for iCarly in "iWill Date Freddie" when Freddie briefly left to be cameraman on Valerie's web show. He is seen in the episode "iNevel", holding Nevel and sneezing on him to make him tell Carly, Sam, and Freddie on video that he didn't mean what he said on his Nevelocity review for iCarly. He is then seen in "iDon't Want to Fight", when he buys Peacock feather tissues from Rip-off Rodney. Jeremy is never seen after Season 1.
Wendy (Mary Ann Springer) is one of Carly and the gang's friends on the show. She was seen in "iReunite with Missy", where she told Carly that Freddie gave up a six-month cruise so that Missy would not bother Sam anymore, and in "iDate a Bad Boy", where she came to Carly's home to study. In "iTake on Dingo", she was the first one to hint Dingo Studios ripping off of them, because her little brother was watching a show on Dingo, Totally Teri. She then made an appearance in "iFight Shelby Marx" and finally in the Christmas episode when she claimed that Carly's boyfriend Nevel was looking for her. Wendy is known to gossip about the newest things around the school. She can be seen in the background of Ridgeway when the bell rings.
Wesley (Colin Spencer (Season 1), Victor Kelso (Season 7) ) is one of Freddie's friends. He is very skilled in beat boxing, which he frequently does, much to other people's annoyance. He helps the iCarly gang in iGot Detention by creating a distraction so that the webcast can continue. Wesley doesn't appear in any episodes after Season 1 until the episode "iGo Nuclear" of Season 2.
Kathy (Ashley Argota) is a girl at Carly's school seen in "iHave a Lovesick Teacher." She was the one who told Carly, Sam, and Freddie that Ms. Ackerman's boyfriend broke up with her, before Spencer dated her. Kathy is not seen or mentioned after this episode.
Kathy (Parker McKenna Posey) is a second girl named Kathy who only appears in "iWant My Website Back". She was the girl that Carly, Sam and Gibby pranked. She is never seen after iWantMyWebsiteBack.
Tareen (Libe Barer) is a girl who talks fast but is friends with Carly and the gang. She was seen in "iSpy a Mean Teacher" and "iDon't Want to Fight". Carly stated that she feels as though she needs to "take a nap" after every time she speaks with Tareen. Tareen is not seen after Season 1.
Ripoff Rodney (Christopher David III) is a student at Ridgeway who sells random items for obscene prices. He was seen selling burritos in "iGot Detention", sells Jeremy (Germy) a box of tissues made of peacock feathers, and he traded Sam tickets to see Cuttlefish (a fictional band) for the iCarly T-shirt Carly made, in "iDon't Want to Fight". He is never seen after "iGot Detention".
Duke (Doug Brochu) is a psycho student in Ridgeway who likes to wrestle. He appeared in "iHatch Chicks" as Freddie's lab partner, and in "iLike Jake", when Freddie got pushed around while Duke and his friend were fighting. He is incredibly strong, as he was shown capable of lifting and moving a refrigerator as well as being able to burst his head though a wall. He also appeared in "iSpy on a Mean Teacher." Duke is never seen after Season 1.
Tasha (Nicole Anderson) is a girl at Carly's school who only appeared in "iNevel". Sam, Carly, and Freddie did not like her, and Sam even said, "I wanna do bad things to that chick." Sam then pushes a cart that has Freddie sitting inside it in her direction, and a loud crash is heard off screen. After this Tasha was never seen nor heard from ever again.
Jocelyn (Cynthia Dallas) is a rude senior who appears in "iMake Sam Girlier". She is seen bullying the students in Ridgeway and torturing them (e.g. holding a younger student by his legs for not saying "bless you" after she sneezed). Later in the episode, she loses a fight against Sam in the Groovy Smoothie.
Jonah (Aaron Albert) was Sam's boyfriend in "iHate Sam's Boyfriend." He was shown to be just as obnoxious and rude as Sam, a personality which made Sam fall in love with him. Sam broke up with Jonah after he tried to kiss Carly. Jonah also ruined Spencer's claymation movie, making him cut it down to only 10 seconds long, when it was originally supposed to be 10 minutes long. Sam got revenge by wedgie bouncing Jonah on iCarly. He is never seen or mentioned after that, but he was seen in the background in the episode iOMG when Freddie was testing out the mood app.
Jake Krandle (Austin Butler) is Carly's first love interest in "iLike Jake". Also, almost every other girl in Carly's school has a crush on Jake, too. When Carly invites him over to sing on iCarly, the iCarly gang realizes he has a terrible voice. Freddie fixes the problem by digitally altering his voice to make it sound better, and Jake gets back together with his girlfriend the next day. He is never seen nor mentioned after this. Austin Butler first appeared in Zoey 101 on February 13, 2007 in the episode, Quarantine (Season 3, Episode 4) as Danifer, then he portrayed James Garrett on February 10, 2008 in the episode, Rumor of Love (Season 4, Episode 4).
Magic Malika (Skyler Day) only appeared in "iSpeed Date" as a date for Freddie to the Girls Choice dance. She had a very odd and ridiculous personality. She is a great magician, supposedly making a ball of paper vanish, making herself vanish and make Gibby appear, and making Freddie's cellphone float in the air.
Pete (Graham Patrick Martin) is Sam's love interest in "iMake Sam Girlier". He praised Sam for being tough and aggressive during her birthday party, which made Sam want to change into a more girlier image. Pete tells her later on that he prefers dating a girl who can kiss well and beat someone up when she needs to, rather than dating a "daffodil." Pete is never seen nor mentioned after this. Also it is never stated what happened to his relationship with Sam.
Shane (James Maslow) was Carly and Sam's crush in "iSaw Him First", who Carly and Sam found very attractive. He fell down an elevator shaft after he tried to storm out of the room after he got tired of Carly and Sam's arguing over him. He was shown to survive with major injuries. It's possible he's not seen nor mentioned because he is recovering. It is also shown after Carly kisses him he has a reaction and moves a little. He is played by James Maslow who is more recently seen as a main character in the Nickelodeon TV series Big Time Rush as James Diamond.
Shannon Mitchell (Annamarie Kenoyer) was Gibby's crush in "iWin a Date". In turn, she appeared to have a crush on Freddie, but Freddie wanted nothing to do with her. The iCarly gang set her and her friends up to be on a blind date for a chance to go out with Gibby, but after Shannon showed up alone, Gibby chose the wrong girl (Carly). Then, they go on a triple date at The Cheesecake Warehouse (a parody of The Cheesecake Factory) with pairs Carly and Gibby; Sam and Reuben; and Freddie and Shannon. This made matters worse, since Shannon kept obsessing over Freddie. After Gibby acted like himself in front of her, she left The Cheesecake Warehouse and is never seen after this.
Shawn (Matthew Moy) is a friend of Carly, Sam, and Freddie who is also part of the Mathletes club with Freddie in "iMeet Fred". He also appeared in "iHave My Principals," "iFight Shelby Marx" and "iBelieve in Bigfoot". He also appears to have a crush on Carly from iHave My Principals.
Taryn is a girl who was seen in "iPilot" as the trumpet player on a pogo stick. Carly and Sam chose her to be one of the students to perform on the talent show, but Ms. Briggs rejected Taryn because she did not consider her act as "talent". She is not seen after this.
Simon Kendall (Simon Bernal) was a boy who could squirt milk out of his eye. He appeared in "iPilot" and "iCarly Awards".
Nate Garner (Spencer Boldman) was invited to a dance by Carly, when about to invite him, accidentally spat in his eye. Sam ended up telling everyone, and even tweeting about it to all of iCarly's Twitter followers. He is not seen after this episode.
Brennan Yubberly (Brennan Mejia) was one of those auditioned for the talent show in "iPilot", in which he could say anything backwards. Brennan has not been seen nor mentioned after this episode.
Rebecca Berkowitz (Katherine M. Ellis) was a girl seen in the extended version of "iSaw Him First". In the version on television, only her name was stated by Sam. She was later mentioned by Nate, claiming she already asked him to the dance before Carly, but Carly thought he turned her down because Carly accidentally spit in his eye. It is not known if she will make another appearance or will be mentioned.
Rueben (Gary Pease) was Gibby's best friend who had a huge crush on Sam the minute he first laid eyes on her. He was known for speaking in strange metaphors that only Gibby, could understand. His mother was from Australia, hence his Southern Australian accent, and his father was from America. Sam did not like him at all and eventually grew tired of him by saying that she was on a date with "an Australian Eskimo who's got ointment all over his bumbleberry!" He then fled the place in tears saying "Oh I can't believe you just said that to me!" He only appeared in iWin a Date.


== Minor charactersEdit ==
Officer Carl (Christopher Michael) is a police officer that appeared in "iWant More Viewers" and "iMove Out". He arrests Spencer in "iWant More Viewers" due to a sign that he and Freddie made, that malfunctioned and caused a series of accidents, spelling out "Pee on Carl" to which he thought it was targeted at him. He later appears in "iMove Out." He refuses to arrest the petographers for vandalizing the iCarly studio because they took pictures of his daughter's bunny for free. He then gives Carly a ticket for their car seat prop not having a front license plate. Carly angrily replies that it is a prop and Carl exclaims "So are you!" He also tells Spencer to watch his attitude because he still remembers "Pee On Carl". He hasn't made any more appearances since then.
Aspartamay (Jack Black) is Spencer's video game rival in "iStart a Fan War". He and Spencer come face-to-face at Webicon. At the end of the show, Aspartamay was "killed" by Carly by stealing his jewel revealing that it's his life force. He sings a song before his "death" and falls to the ground.
Pam Puckett (Jane Lynch) is the mother of Sam Puckett (and her sister Melanie) who appears only in "iSam's Mom". During the first three seasons, she was mentioned in almost every episode, but had never been seen in person. Whenever Sam mentioned her, it was either something negative, or something that would gross out people. She is described as "poor", "desperate", and "hostile". Generally, she is indeed hostile to Sam, in which, Sam is hostile in the same manner. It is shown in "iSam's Mom" that she is somewhat desperate since she asks a stranger if he would like to marry her. She likes Melanie more than Sam, seeing the highly noticeable difference between the two. This gets on Sam's nerves when she compares her to Melanie, which causes another argument. She is known for her "frequent dating" (something mentioned by Sam in nearly every episode) and "driving issues", as shown in "iMust Have Locker 239". It is also revealed that she has a love interest for Italian men, as mentioned by Sam in "iGot a Hot Room" so this means Sam and Melanie could be half Italian. At the end of "iSam's Mom", they make up and reconcile their differences. She reappears onscreen in the episode "iShock America" wearing a bikini, but only the lower-half of her body is seen and she has no lines.
Krustacia (Irina Voronina) is Spencer's date in the episode "iSell Penny Tees". She is a foreign woman from Uzbekistan. She speaks no English at all, so Spencer has to use hand motions to communicate with her. In the end of this episode, Gibby invites his Uzbek bus driver named Foogtor to Carly and Spencer's loft to teach Spencer Uzbek. It turns out Foogtor's brother is the one who can translate causing Spencer to yell "well why didn't you ask the brother?". Krustacia and Foogtor walk out of the loft. Krustacia and Foogtor are never seen again after that.
Gordon Birch (J. D. Walsh) and Jodi Flooger (Rakefet Abergel) are a couple from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. They only appear in the special "iDo". Gordon asks Jodi to marry him live on an iCarly episode, Jodi says yes, and Gordon wants to sing Miranda Cosgrove's song "Shakespeare". He tries to sing it both on iCarly and at the wedding but both times, he got nervous and urinated on himself. At the wedding Carly sings the song for Gordon. Spencer walks in on iCarly when Gordon proposes to Jodi. Jodi immediately falls in love with Spencer after already telling Gordon she would marry him. Jodi loves the song Gordon wrote for her, so at the end of "iDo" she decides to marry him. Jodi and Gordon are not seen after iDo probably because they live halfway across the country.
Note: At the wedding, Carly and Sam are the bridesmaids, and Freddie is Gordon's best man.
Harper (Leon Thomas III) is the leader of the band that played in "iCarly Saves TV." He played the piano on the TV show and sang a song on guitar on the webshow. Leon Thomas III appears as Andre in "iParty with Victorious" in which they only say that Tori looks like Shelby Marx but they don't say that Andre looks like Harper.
Greg Horvath (Kevin Symons) is the CEO of the DAKA Shoe Company (also mentioned in Drake and Josh) in "iPromote Techfoots". He hires the iCarly kids to endorse their new athletic shoe, the Techfoot, on their webshow. After the kids discover that the shoes have many defects, they try to get the company to recall their product, Instead, Horvath threatens to sue iCarly for breach of contract. Luckily, Spencer put his three days of law school to work, and discovered a loophole in the contract, which requires the iCarly gang to only say "positive" things about the Techfoots. The kids then proceed to highlight all the shoe's defects on the show, in a sarcastic but positive matter. Realizing that he has been outsmarted, Horvath is forced to buy out the kids' contract. If he refused, he would be countersued for tricking the kids into advertising the faulty shoes.
Mr. Galini: was the Italian owner of Galini's Pie Shop, featured in "iPie". He was hospitalized for an unknown reason, and died a few days later. He was 97 years old at the time of his death, and was survived by his granddaughter, Trudy. On the morning of Mr. Galini's death, Spencer called the hospital and was informed that Mr. Galini had "checked out." Spencer apparently misunderstood what the hospital was saying, and thought that Mr. Galini had been released. It wasn't until he arrived at the pie shop (to purchase more pies) that he learned from Mario, Mr. Galini's employee, that Mr. Galini had died. The iCarly gang went to Mr. Galini's wake a few days later, in the hopes of finding his pie recipes, which Trudy had told them was "in his computer," at least according to her grandfather (although Trudy was never able to find them). Spencer and Carly provided a distraction while Sam and Freddie tried to find the recipes in the computer. During an argument, Sam and Freddie wound up knocking over the computer and breaking it. Then, Carly discovered that the pie recipes were hidden, literally, in the computer itself. With the recipes recovered, the pie shop was saved from being closed.
Mario (Jim Pirri): an Italian immigrant friend of Mr. Galini who works at Mr. Galini's pie shop. He told Carly and the gang that Mr. Galini died (which Spencer thought he was released from the hospital to make more pies). His first and only appearance was in "iPie". Mario has worked with Mr. Galini at his pie shop as a cashier at the pie shop for twenty years. Then, when Mr. Galini died, he was about to close down the pie shop but sold cherries and water on the last day of the shop's business. Then, when the iCarly trio found the pie recipe, he went back to work with his niece or niece-in-law Trudy.
Trudy Galini (Wendy Haines): is the granddaughter of Mr. Galini, seen in the episode "iPie". She is very awkward and weird, and seems to lead a depressing life. Her habits include eating packets of sweetener, twirling her hair, and attempting to kiss Spencer, with whom she went out only once. However, Spencer's motive in dating her was only to be able to get Mr. Galini's pie recipe after he had died. She aspires to become an actress, but at the end of the episode, Trudy says that she will give up her dream of becoming an actress to re-open the pie shop and run it.
Shelby Marx (Victoria Justice) appears in "iFight Shelby Marx". She is the youngest champion in the CFC and becomes a friend of Carly, Sam and Freddie. After Nevel tricks her into believing Carly meant to tackle her grandmother, she, Freddie, Carly, Gibby and Sam get their revenge on him. Victoria Justice later made an appearance in "iParty with Victorious" starring as her Tori Vega character from Victorious. Conveniently enough in regards the Tori character, Sam says to Carly: "She looks like that Shelby Marx chick you fought". Shelby has not been seen since "iFight Shelby Marx".
Tongue Boy (Nick Afanasiev) is a recipient of an iCarly award for "most interesting yet frightening tongue of all time" in the episode "iCarly Awards." After receiving his award, he wiggles his tongue in the faces of Carly and Sam, and then reaches his tongue towards Spencer, who exclaims, "Don't do that!"
Ginger Fox (Betsy Rue) only appears in "iFix a Popstar". She is a parody of singer Britney Spears. She was once a Pop Music Award-winner but is revealed to have lost her talent and gone crazy, throwing forks at people when she is angry. Ginger has a 6-month-old son named Billy, is divorced, and tries to teach her rabbit to do tricks, but never does. Ginger fired her director because "he kept telling [her] what to do". The iCarly crew were hired to make a music video for her comeback, and despite Ginger's lack of talent, they were successful, which left the iCarly group shocked, but not her fans. She is not seen after this but her songs can be heard in the background of iCarly and Victorious. Also her songs are sung by cast members of both shows.
Shadow Hammer (Aaron Aguilera) is a criminal who appears in "iSam's Mom". He had never been caught on video because he sneaks in before robbing a place and disables the cameras. This changes when Freddie uses his spy glasses and catches him, but when T-Bo and a newscaster talk about how he did, Freddie worries that Shadow Hammer will find him and beat him down. Spencer fixes the problem by changing the sign in his apartment to 8H instead of 8D. At the end of the episode, Shadow Hammer looks for Apartment 8D, and leaves when he sees the sign at Freddie's apartment reading 8H. It is not known what happens to the people who really reside in 8H and what happens to him.
Chip Chambers (Jacob Bertrand) is the more menacing younger brother of Chuck Chambers. When Chuck was put in Military School Chip took over as Spencer's Nemesis. He attacked him with Fruit and Hogtied him with an apple in his mouth and playing loud music above the gang and he'll mess with Carly just like his brother Chuck messes with Spencer all the time. While preparing for a prank with another boy Gibby's phaser is thrown by them overloading in the process. It explodes sending Chip stuck to the wall. Spencer sprays cream on Chip's butt and leaves. Chip still stuck to the elevator yells "Hey, who's tickling my Butt?!". He is not seen after "iBattle Chip" probably because he realized that neither Spencer or any Of the iCarly quartet aren't worth messing with.
Mrs. Papperman (Wendy Braun) is Nevel's mother. She is only seen in "iNevel," in which she forced Nevel to remove a bad review he wrote about iCarly. Only her voice is heard in later episodes, including "iRue The Day" and "iFight Shelby Marx".
The Dorfmans (Dalton O'Dell, Shane Partlow, Casey Williams, and Stephanie C. Allen) are Carly's nerdy cousins whom she despises due to them being uncontrollably annoying. The family consists of Carly's Uncle Barry, Aunt Tess, and Cousins Ozlottis and Faye. Ozlottis wears a cone around his neck because he has a scab on his chin. They only appear in "iFence", where Carly asks Sam to eat with her while they visit, but as soon as Sam meets them herself, she hates them too. Carly tells her to stay since Spencer is not home yet and she cannot spend two hours with them, but Sam claims it cannot be that bad. Carly was forced to make a green-colored vegetable pudding for them, which tasted horrible to her. They aren't mentioned probably because Carly and Spencer don't like them and because they live in Fresno, California.
Kyoko and Yuki (Ally Maki and Harry Shum, Jr.) are two Japanese webstars whom iCarly competed against in iGo to Japan. They attempted to ruin iCarly's chances of winning the iWeb Awards by stranding them in the middle of nowhere. Ultimately, iCarly makes it to the awards and retaliates by sabotaging their presentation, winning the awards and revealing their evil plan in the process. As a result, they are arrested for kidnapping. Maki and Shum, Jr., like their characters, is of Asian descent, with Maki of Japanese descent and Shum, Jr. of Chinese descent.
Mystery Girl is a little girl (Anna Clark) who appears in "iSpace Out". Spencer thought she was a figment of his imagination because he missed Carly so much, but at the end of the episode, Carly could see her too. The girl did not do anything to Carly and left the apartment. It is not known what her true name is and why only she appears to Carly and Spencer.
Gunsmoke (Anthony Vitale) is a bodyguard who appears in "iSam's Mom". Mrs. Benson hires him to protect Freddie when she worries about the Shadowhammer. However, he tends to get overprotective, as shown when he grabs Carly when she enters the apartment, and breaks Spencer's snow-cone machine thinking that it had something dangerous in it. He claims to have fought in three wars and is fond of Full House. His name is a pun on the TV/Radio show "Gunsmoke".
Marta Trundel (Kit Pongetti) is Lewbert's former girlfriend. Carly, Sam, and Freddie try to reunite Marta and Lewbert in "iFind Lewbert's Lost Love", only to find out that they broke up because of Marta's obsessiveness and that she is the presumed cause of Lewbert becoming what he is today in the show. It is unknown if she gave up on Lewbert and dated Spencer or if she left and was being given a restraining order from Lewbert.
Wade Collins (Alex Schemmer) is a British-Canadian aspiring singer and a shouter who refers to Americans as "hobknockers." Due to interference by the iCarly gang, he lost the final round of America Sings (parody of American Idol). The group offered to make a music video for him, only to discover he is a nasty, egotistical jerk. He steals the video after it is complete, but the iCarly gang gets revenge by showing everyone what an awful person he is and telling them where he is staying where he is presumably beaten senseless. His music video is given back to iCarly. He is mentioned again in "iFix a Popstar", where it is revealed the music video they made for him was one of the top ten most watched videos of all time.
Doug Toder (Daniel Samonas) is Spencer's old arch rival in "iFence". He challenged Freddie to a fencing competition, only to be beaten by him and Ms. Benson. He is never seen again after this.
Veronica (Valerie Azlynn) was Spencer's date in "iMake Sam Girlier", but their relationship happened only because of his tuxedo. She returns in "iEnrage Gibby", to express condolence when she thinks Spencer is dead, and as she starts to regret breaking up with him, Spencer ruins the moment by jumping out and shouting "You CAN hold me!" She then leaves in disgust and horror.
Detective Stuart 'Spanky' Stimbler (Ryan Bollman) is a childhood rival of Spencer. His name refers to the fact that he likes to spank unsuspecting people as a joke. He has a son and works for the Seattle Police Department. He and his partner use Carly and Spencer's apartment as a stakeout in an attempt to catch a video pirate. When the investigation was over, Spencer was able to trap Stimbler's son in a plastic transparent tube, and handcuffed Stimbler himself to the couch. Spencer then proceeded to get revenge by spanking Stimbler on the buttocks with one of his brooms. Stimbler is never seen again nor mentioned, probably because Spencer hates him.
Tasha (Emily Ratajkowski) is Gibby's girlfriend. She had a minor role in "iSpeed Date" and a major role in "iEnrage Gibby". In "iEnrage Gibby", Gibby temporally breaks up with her after believing that she was cheating on him with Freddie when he sees her on top of him, causing him to go crazy and plan to fight Freddie for revenge. After Freddie proves to Gibby that he was not trying to steal his girlfriend and that she had just tripped (proved by the lets watch food rot camera), Gibby and Tasha reconcile and walk away and the iCarly gang could not believe that Tasha liked Gibby.
Harry Joyner (Oliver Muirhead) is Spencer's favorite sculptor, and appears in "iHeart Art." According to Joyner, he has made a sculpture out of every substance known to man, and when he met Spencer for the first time, he was planning to make a human sculpture. When meeting Spencer, he saw many of his famous pieces, and then commented that "he didn't love them," and stated they were "amateur-ish at best". Spencer was heartbroken and considered giving up art. Carly went to Joyner and demanded he apologize to her brother. At first, he declined, remarking that he has no time for this, but when Carly points out how Spencer became depressed with Harry's vision over his art, Harry feels guilty and decided to go tell Spencer the real reason that he made the remarks (that he was "jealous" of Spencer's sculptures because they were "better than anything that he has done in a real long time"). They made amends and started to make a sculpture of a jaw for a local dentist, which was where Spencer worked before Joyner's apology. Joyner has never been seen or mentioned again.
Amber Tate (Rachel G. Fox) is a spoiled child actress that appears in "iCarly Saves TV", where she acts mean to the iCarly gang and her dog vomits on Freddie.
Granddad Shay (Greg Mullavey) is Carly and Spencer's paternal grandfather who lives in Yakima, Washington. In "iWanna Stay With Spencer", he attempted to get Carly to move with him because he thought Spencer was an irresponsible guardian. In the end, he allowed Carly to stay with Spencer after Spencer demanded he take her asthma inhaler with them even though Carly had not had an asthma attack since she was seven and was saving it "just in case". It is mentioned there, when he discusses with Spencer, that he is a lawyer. Ever since his visit, however, Spencer has become a little more serious with Carly. He loves to exercise and can do a handstand while walking. In "iWant a World Record", he appears for a few seconds on the web show, but is not seen again later, but is mentioned several times in the show. He reappears in the episode, "iHire An Idiot", after his almost 3 season absence.
Col. Steven Shay (David Chisum) is Carly and Spencer's father who is a Colonel in the United States Air Force. He has appeared in a few episodes, but has mostly been stationed on a base in Italy. In the final episode, Carly left with him to stay with him in Italy.
Amanda "Mandy" Valdez (Aria Wallace) is an obsessed fan of iCarly and only appears in "iAm Your Biggest Fan" and "iWant My Website Back". She is loud and outgoing, and is considered insane and annoying by the iCarly gang. She has an awkward habit of wearing duck masks. It appears she switches fandom very quickly, going from iCarly to the band Spencer was in, claiming to be their biggest fan. She is gullible, as shown in "iWant My Website Back" when she accidentally gives away the iCarly site to Nevel. She is never seen or mentioned after that probably because the gang hate her and she lives in Tacoma.
Nora Dershlit (Danielle Morrow) is a psychotic and lonely girl who is a crazy fan of iCarly and has no friends except for her chicken Maurice and her equally psychotic parents leaving her to her own devices. Nora kissed a girl (Daniella Monet) from her school willingly Nora also apparently has a crush on Freddie. She first appears in "iPsycho" (Season 3), where she kidnaps Carly, Sam, and Freddie after they helped her become popular with the kids at her school. After a lengthy fight with Gibby while his brother frees the iCarly gang, Nora is knocked out by Sam pressing a pressure point in her shoulder (the fictional Vulcan nerve pinch) and is arrested soon after. Nora returns two seasons later in the sequel, "iStill Psycho", having been paroled from the past incident and seemingly turned over a new leaf. However, it was a ruse to trap the ICarly gang with her parents helping her take Spencer hostage so they can endlessly repeat her 16th birthday party. However, Mrs. Benson and T-bo came to the rescue with Nora again arrested for her parole violation along with her parents as co-conspirators. In the spin-off series Sam and Cat, having worked out in the jail's gym with her obsession for them becoming utter hate, Nora breaks out of jail during the events of "#SuperPsycho" to exact revenge on the iCarly gang. Learning that Carly is at Italy, Nora decides to go after Sam instead by abducting her friend Dice with the intention to shave off his hair to wear as wig. But Sam easily defeats Nora and pushes her into the pit she holds Dice and Cat. Soon after, the authorities taking her to a maximum security prison while she declares her revenge has extended to the Sam and Cat gang.
Griffin (Drew Roy) is a bad boy that Carly dates in "iDate a Bad Boy". Griffin steals Spencer's motorcycle and Spencer takes him under his wing. Carly is not comfortable with Griffin hanging around the loft until she falls for him, which Spencer does not approve of. At the middle of the episode, Carly and Griffin argue, but it is revealed that it was just a trick to get Spencer to think she is over him. They officially break up at the end of the episode after Carly and Sam make fun of his obsession with Pee-Wee Babies and he overhears them. He returns in "iBeat the Heat", where he is more eccentric than ever as he tries to kiss Carly and comes to the Shays' air conditioned loft because his Pee-Wee Babies cannot be in extreme hot or cold air or they will become misshapen. This makes Sam upset and tells him he "needs to stop obsessing over his dumb little Play Pretties" and she throws one of them out of anger.
Sasha Striker (Lorena York) was the world's best Pak-Rat (parody of Pac-Man) player who appeared in "iStage an Intervention". When Spencer becomes obsessed with Pak-Rat (not wanting to stop playing until he defeats her record), the iCarly gang track her down via their web-show. She is quite beautiful, compelling the reporters covering Spencer's attempt to beat her score to try and ask her to be their girlfriend (she ignores all of the requests). After Spencer defeats her, they flirt and kiss for a few seconds, and she is never seen again.
Jackson Colt (Terrell Lee) is a top 10 MMA fighter and appears only in iLook Alike. He has a son named Kevin Colt and is very sensitive when he does not get what he wants. He is a fan of Carly's comedy on the show, especially Random Dancing.
Hazel (Sherry Weston) is an elderly woman that Gibby met while riding down the street on his bike in "iDo". Once he sees her, he asks her if she can help him retrieve a five-dollar bill that he spotted in a tree. She accepts the offer, but only after Gibby promises her they will go get coffee afterwords. She helps him get the bill by letting him get on her shoulders. After retrieving the bill, she falls down and Gibby drives off and forgets about her. She is last seen on the ground mumbling "Are we still going to get coffee?".
Cal (Jake Siegel) was Carly's assistant in "iGo Nuclear". He was helping her with a school science project during Green Week in Mr. Henning's class, so she would not have to serve the "Root & Berry" retreat. He was actually a criminal because he built illegal nuclear projects using black market uranium. His true self is not revealed until the end of the episode, when three police officers found out who he was after asking where he got his haircut in the Groovy Smoothie. He then bolts out of the shop and the officers reveal his criminal acts, forcing Carly to attend the "Root & Berry" retreat.
Mitch (Danny Woodburn) appears in "iChristmas." He is the guardian angel who granted Carly's wish for Spencer to become normal. When this affects her entire life, however, she soon regrets it and wants everything changed back. Having learned her lesson, Mitch returns Carly's life to normal. In the end, Carly sees a vision of Mitch earning his "wings" (in this case, a bucket of chicken wings).
Melanie Puckett (Jennette McCurdy) is Sam's identical twin sister and appears in "iTwins". According to Sam, she is a straight "A" student, follows all the rules, and goes to a fancy boarding school. She is the total opposite of Sam and even has a crush on Freddie, much to Sam's dismay. Freddie, however, does not believe Melanie is real and thinks that Sam is just pretending to be her, so he asks Melanie out on a date. Due to his beliefs no matter what anybody says, Sam and Carly eventually agree with Freddie, but Sam and Melanie are then seen in the loft elevator together. She is mentioned again in "iThink They Kissed", when Freddie is talking about if he might have kissed someone before. In "iSam's Mom", while Sam is fighting with her mother, Pam asks why she can't be more like Melanie. She is never seen again (except one time on the iCarly/Victorious spin-off, Sam and Cat) because she goes to a boarding school and is never mentioned by Sam because she can't stand Melanie.
Fleck and Dave (Daven Wilson and Joey Luthman) are two young teenage boys who cohost a web show, and appear in "iQuit iCarly." The two are good friends, but have very differing opinions, such as the personalities of Carly and Sam. Fleck believes that comedy is more important than safety, like Sam, and Dave is responsible and takes care of everything, like Carly. This comes to a head when Fleck paints Dave's dad's car purple for a bit in one of their shows featuring the iCarly gang. An argument breaks out which results in Fleck and Dave separating. Carly and Sam try to patch the problem, but Fleck and Dave both make Sam and Carly think about how the two treat one another. This results in the separation of Carly and Sam. When Spencer helps Sam save Carly's life, they all become friends again. In the end, the four webshowees, along with Freddie, make a fake movie trailer called "The Blowing."
David Archuleta (David Archuleta) made his first appearance is "iRocked the Vote" competing with Wade Collins. David won the vote on "America Sings" (A parody of American Idol) thanks to Sam and Carly.
Cort and Ashley (Daniel Booko and Teresa Castillo) are two teenagers hired as interns in the episode "iHire An Idiot". Cort was hired unrespectively by Carly and Sam without Freddie's approval. Ashley was another intern hired by Freddie without Carly or Sam's permission, and this leads to Carly and Sam trying to get him to fire Ashley. Freddie proclaims that Carly and Sam have to fire Cort first and then he will fire Ashley, but this does not happen until the end of the episode. At the end of the episode, it is revealed that Cort was kicked out of college because he was claimed to be dangerously stupid. Also, it is revealed that, unlike Cort, Ashley works at the Brilliance Bar at the local Pear Computers store (Freddie makes her act stupid to trick Carly and Sam into firing Cort). Cort is later mentioned in "iOMG". It is hinted that Cort and Ashley later dated after the end of "iHire an Idiot".
Steven Carson (Cameron Stewart) is Carly and Tori's ex-boyfriend on "iParty with Victorious." Carly searches Steven's name, and after she sees a picture of him with his arm around another girl (Tori Vega), Carly, Sam, Freddie, Gibby, and Spencer go to Kenan Thompson's party to find out if Steven is cheating. In disguise, Carly sees Steven give Tori a charm bracelet and says "It's one of a kind, just like you." then kisses her which is exactly what he did with Carly. After the iCarly gang take off their disguises, Tori walks in searching for Steven, and upon seeing iCarly exclaims "Oh my gosh iCarly! Do you know how inlove I am with your show?" then Carly replies "No, but I do know how inlove you are with my boyfriend." Carly explains everything to Tori and they agree they need to get revenge on Steven. When Steven walks into the closet where he and Tori are supposed to have there 100-day kiss, he is surprised to find Kenan Thompson who blows a loud horn in his ear, Carly, and Tori who are doing a live iCarly webcast and announce that Steven is both of their ex's and tell everyone that he is a no-good cheater.
Goopy Gilbert (Jeremy Dozier) is an extreme Seddie fan best known for shouting "SEDDIE!" He is first seen in "iStart a Fanwar" as a Seddier in the crowd. In "iLost My Mind" he is the second videochatter debating whether or not Sam and Freddie should be together. Gilbert apparently still lives with his mother due to her shouting to him that it was dinner time. He loves spaghetti and his bedroom is decorated with pictures of Sam and Freddie.
Michelle Obama (Michelle Obama) made an appearance on "iMeet the First Lady" in season five.
Rex Powers from Victorious has appeared in 3 episodes of iCarly. He has appeared in "iParty with Victorious", "iBloop 2 Electric Bloopoo", and "iApril Fools".


== Character appearancesEdit ==
This table lists main characters and recurring characters, and records the number of appearances of each character in each season. They are listed in order of most episodes.


== Guest appearancesEdit ==


== ReferencesEdit ==