Domestic technology is the incorporation of applied science into the home. There are many aspects of domestic technology. On one level, there are home appliances, home automation and other devices commonly used in the home, such as clothes dryers and washing machines. These things are itemized below. On another level, domestic technology recognizes the use of applied science to construct homes to achieve a particular goal, such as energy efficiency or self-sufficiency. For more information, read about self-sufficient homes. It has been claimed that domestic technology has led to decreases in the time people spend on household work, although the factual basis of this claim is disputed (Bittman et al., 2004). There are many technologies now routinely used around modern homes, itemized below.
Air conditioning
Central heating
Cleaning
Clothes dryer
Broom
Dishwasher
Mop
Sink
Shower
Bath
Vacuum cleaner
Washing machine

Computer
PC

Food preparation
Barbecue
Breadmaker
Blender
Faucet
Food processor
Microwave oven
Mixer
Oven

Food storage
Can
Canning
Refrigerator

Home maintenance
Groundskeeping equipment
Garden tools
Paint sprayer

Knitting machine
Plumbing
Power generation
Solar cell
Windmill

Telephone
Window


== See alsoEdit ==
Air quality
Food safety
Home automation
Major appliance
Water quality


== ReferencesEdit ==
Bittman, Michael; Rice, James Mahmud; & Wajcman, Judy. (2004). "Appliances and their impact: The ownership of domestic technology and time spent on household work". British Journal of Sociology 55 (3), 401–423. (PDF file)
Habib, Laurence. Computers in the family: A study of technology in the domestic sphere. PhD Thesis, London, UK: London School of Economics and Political Sciences (LSE) 2000 401–423. (PDF file)
Ruth Schwartz Cowan, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (Basic Books, 1983) ISBN 0-465-04731-9
Siddiqui, Shakeel and Darach Turley,(2006), 'Media Technologies: Mediated Families' In: Gavan Fitzsimons and Vicki Morwitz ed. Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 34, Association for Consumer Research: Orlando


== External linksEdit ==
ICS 97.040.30 Domestic refrigerating appliances