TriYoga is a hatha yoga method with a "trinity emphasis on asana (posture), pranayama (breath) and mudra (focus)". The origin and continued development of TriYoga is guided by kundalini-inspired kriyavati siddhi as expressed through Kali Ray. Currently, there are over 1700 registered teachers in over 40 countries of North and South America, Australia, Asia, and Europe.


== Overview ==
TriYoga fundamentals include:
a wave-like spinal movement with emphasis on moving vertebra by vertebra while maintaining core alignment through transitional movements
relaxation in action to engage only the muscles necessary for each posture and transition, increasing energy and relaxation with each transition
economy of motion: maintaining common alignment between postures and eliminating excess or unfocussed movements, preserving precise alignments to support the skeletal and muscular systems.
Practitioners learn to sustain continued awareness on all aspects of the practice.


== Practice ==
TriYoga consists of Basics, in which students learn fundamental movements and breathing techniques, through Level 7. Within each level, students increase their knowledge of posture and flow, as well as comprehensively building strength, flexibility, endurance and breath control. Due to the systematic approach, students of all levels may practice together, modifying sequences to their own abilities. 
In addition to 7 levels of asana practice, TriYoga consists of systematic pranayama (breathing practices), dharana (concentration techniques) and over 1000 unique hasta mudras (hand gestures).
Each level consists of 5 series, corresponding to the five elements (earth, water, fire, air and space) and the chakras. Many of the series also include a variety of condensed versions, offering over 20 sequences per level. Basics consists of 108 postures, Level 1 over 200, Level 2 over 350, and Level 3 over 450. 


== Training and certification ==
Teachers complete a 150- or 200- hour training in the Basic sequences before beginning to teach TriYoga. All training programs include natural alignment and practical anatomy, the use of props to improve alignment, ways to modify postures or flows for students with different needs, knowledge of sequences, and benefits of the postures. Teachers are certified by a teacher trainer, who have an average of 12 years training with Kali Ray and continue to study regularly with her.


== References ==


== External links ==
Kali Ray TriYoga
Health Blog
Yoga types