The Slinger is a Midwestern diner specialty typically consisting of two eggs, hash browns, and a hamburger patty (or any other meat) all covered in chili con carne (with or without beans) and generously topped with cheese (cheddar or American) and onions. The eggs can be any style. Hot sauce is usually served on the side. The Slinger is considered to be a St. Louis late-night culinary original. It is described as "a hometown culinary invention: a mishmash of meat, hash-fried potatoes, eggs, and chili, sided with your choice of ham, sausage, bacon, hamburger patties, or an entire T-bone steak.


== VariationsEdit ==
There are numerous variations of the basic Slinger:
"Top One": Has a tamale served on top of the Slinger.
"Vegetarian": Uses veggie burgers and veggie chili.
"The Toby"/"The Hoosier": Slinger that has white gravy instead of chili. (Named after a customer at Tiffany's Original Diner.)
"Yin and Yang": Slinger covered in half chili/half gravy. A customer favorite at Tiffany's Original Diner, and named by manager Tom Gray. (The Yin Yang is both light and dark in color.)
"The Jared": Slinger with equal amounts of chili and white
"The JP Slinger": Slinger with hamburger patty, extra onions and extra chili.
"Devil's Delight": Slinger minus the hamburgers patties at Courtesy Diner.
"Chicago Style": Served with White Bread Toast on the side, burgers are specified as "cheeseburger patties", eggs are specified as Over Easy, and must contain grilled onions. 


== See alsoEdit ==

St. Louis cuisine
Garbage Plate, the Rochester, NY area style plate piled with diner type foods
Horseshoe sandwich, Springfield, IL open-faced sandwich covered with fries and cheese sauce
Hot hamburger plate, an open-faced sandwich covered with fries and gravy
Cincinnati chili, a Midwestern-style of chili often served piled high
Loco Moco, Hawaiian dish with many foods served on rice
Poutine, a Quebec dish, made with french fries, topped with brown gravy and curd cheese.


== ReferencesEdit ==
^ Cheap Eats - - Calendar - St. Louis - Riverfront Times
^ "The Legendary Slinger and Dick Burger at Diner Grill". Eater.com. Retrieved 7 April 2015. 
^ "Chicago's Best Late Night: Diner Grill". Retrieved 7 April 2015.