Tony Rothman (born 1953) is an American theoretical physicist, academic and writer.


== Early life ==
Tony is the son of physicist and science fiction writer Milton A. Rothman. Rothman has a B.A. from Swarthmore College, (1975) and a Ph.D from the University of Texas at Austin (1981), where he studied at the Center for Relativity. He continued on post-doctoral fellowships at Oxford, the University of Moscow and the University of Cape Town.


== Career ==
Rothman worked briefly as an editor at Scientific American, then taught at Harvard, Illinois Wesleyan University, Bryn Mawr College and more recently at Princeton University.
Rothman's scientific research has been concerned mainly with general relativity and cosmology, for which he has made contributions to the study of the early universe, specifically cosmic nucleosynthesis, black holes, inflationary cosmology and gravitons.
Rothman was the scientific editor for Andrei Sakharov's Memoirs and he has contributed to numerous magazines, including Scientific American, Discover, American Scientist, The New Republic and History Today. He has played oboe at a professional level and commissioned a concerto from Aleksandr Raskatov.


== Selected works ==
Tony Rothman's first book, written just after graduating college, was The World is Round (Ballantine, 1978), a science fiction novel about the evolution of society on a non-earthlike planet. His experiences in Russia resulted in publication of a collection of short stories entitled Censored Tales (1989). He has also published six books of popular science and science history. His collection A Physicist on Madison Avenue (1991) was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize, while Doubt and Certainty, with George Sudarshan, was chosen by the A-List as one of the 200 best books of 1998. He co-authored Sacred Mathematics: Japanese Temple Geometry with Fukagawa Hidetoshi. Published in 2008, this was the first history of sangaku in English, and won the Association of American Publisher's 2008 PROSE award for Professional and Scholarly Excellence in mathematics.
Rothman's published writings encompass hundreds of works in 7 languages and include 3,073 library holdings.

2015 — The Course of Fortune
2015 — Firebird
2008 — Sacred mathematics: Japanese temple geometry (with Hidetoshi Fukagawa)
2003 — Everything's relative: and other fables from science and technology
1998 — Doubt and certainty: the celebrated academy (with E.C.G. Sudarshan)
1995 — Instant physics: from Aristotle to Einstein, and beyond
1991 — A physicist on Madison Avenue
1989 — Science à la mode: physical fashions and fictions
1989 — Censored tales
1985 — Frontiers of modern physics: new perspectives on cosmology, relativity, black holes, and extraterrestrial intelligence
1978 — The World is Round


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Tony Rothman's home page
Tony Rothman at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database