The Torricelli languages are a language family of about fifty languages of the northern Papua New Guinea coast, spoken by only about 80,000 people. They are named after the Torricelli Mountains. The most populous and best known Torricelli languages are the Arapesh, with about 30,000 speakers.
The most promising external relationship for the Torricelli family is the Sepik languages. In reconstructions of both families, the pronouns have a plural suffix *-m and a dual suffix *-p.
The Torricelli languages occupy three geographically separated areas, evidently separated by migrations of Sepik-language speakers several centuries ago.


== Classification ==
Wilhelm Schmidt linked the Wapei and Monumbo branches, and the coastal western and eastern extremes of the family, in 1905. The family was more fully established by David Laycock in 1965. Most recently, Ross broke up Laycock and Z’graggen's (1975) Kombio branch, placing the Kombio language in the Palei branch and leaving Wom as on its own, with the other languages (Eitiep, Torricelli (Lou), Yambes, Aruek) unclassified due to lack of data.
Wom
Arapesh languages (see)
Maimai branch: Nambi (Nabi), Wiaki (Minidien), Beli, Laeko, Maimai proper (Siliput, Yahang–Heyo)
West Wapei branch: Seti, Seta, One (a dialect cluster)
Marienberg branch: Bungain, Wiarumus (Mandi), Muniwara (Juwal), Urimo, Kamasau, Elepi, Buna
Wapei branch: Gnau, Yis, Yau, Olo, Elkei, Au, Yil, Dia (Alu), Ningil, Sinagen (Galu), Yapunda, Valman
Palei branch: Urim, Urat, Kombio, Agi, Aruop, Wanap (Kayik), Amol (Alatil, Aru), Aiku (Ambrak, Yangum)
Ethnologue also lists Bragat in the Palei branch.
This internal classification is tentative and will likely be substantially revised. The Monumbo languages are traditionally included, but "no evidence ... was ever presented".


== Typological overview ==
The Torricelli languages are unusual among Papuan languages in having a basic clause order of SVO (subject–verb–object). (In contrast, most Papuan languages have SOV order.) It was previously believed that the Torricelli word order was a result of contact with Austronesian languages, but it is now thought more likely that SVO order was present in the Torricelli proto-language. 


== Pronouns ==
The pronouns Ross reconstructs for proto-Torricelli are,


== See also ==
Papuan languages


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Donohue, Mark (2005). "Word order in New Guinea: dispelling a myth". Oceanic Linguistics 44: 527–536. 
Ross, Malcolm (2005), "Pronouns as a preliminary diagnostic for grouping Papuan languages", in Andrew Pawley, Robert Attenborough, Robin Hide and Jack Golson, eds, Papuan pasts: cultural, linguistic and biological histories of Papuan-speaking peoples, Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, pp. 15–66