The Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences is an international research institute for mathematics and theoretical physics at the University of Cambridge. It is named after one of the university's most illustrious figures, the mathematician and natural philosopher Sir Isaac Newton.
Its building adjoins the Cambridge Centre for Mathematical Sciences. In 1993 the British mathematician Andrew Wiles announced at the Institute his proof of Fermat's last theorem. The institute was in 1999 awarded a Queen's Anniversary Prize in recognition of "world-class achievement in education." Its director as of May 2012 was Professor John Toland.


== History ==
It opened in 1992, with support from St John's College and Trinity College in particular. St. John's provided land with a purpose-built building and Trinity provided funds for running costs for a period of five years, and the London Mathematical Society also provided support. After negotiations with the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), then known as the Science and Engineering Research Council, the Institute was chosen from a number of proposals for a national mathematics institute to receive funding. A number of private companies and bodies associated with the University of Cambridge also gave support.
The Institute is formally part of the University of Cambridge, from which it receives funding, but its largest source of funds is the EPSRC, from which it receives £1.6 million annually.


== Scientific programmes ==
There are typically two programmes, each with up to twenty people and lasting between 4 weeks and 6 months. Programmes are chosen by a panel of mathematicians based on the scientific merit and the likelihood of significant progress. During these periods of activity there are courses and workshops for the attendees.
Past visitors include Terence Tao and Murray Gell-Mann. Andrew Wiles chose to reveal his proof of Fermat's Last Theorem over three lectures on 21-23 June 1993 at the Institute.


== Directors ==
1990-1996 Michael Atiyah
1996-2001 Keith Moffatt
2001-2006 John Kingman
2006-2011 David Wallace
2011- John Toland


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Interactive map of the Mathematical Sciences site including links to the departments.